OceanofPDF.com

Copyright © 2021 by Karl Deisseroth All rights reserved. Published in
the United States by Random House, an imprint and division of Penguin
Random House LLC, New York. Random House and the House colophon are
registered trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC. Permission credits
can be found on this page. library of congress cataloging-in-publication
data

Names: Deisseroth, Karl, author. Title: Projections / by Karl
Deisseroth. Description: First edition. \| New York: Random House,
\[2021\] Identifiers: lccn 2020026946 (print) \| lccn 2020026947 (ebook)
\| isbn 9781984853691 (hardcover) \| isbn 9781984853707 (ebook) \| isbn
9780593448168 (international edition) Subjects: LCSH: Client-centered
psychotherapy---Case studies. \| Emotions. \| Mental illness. \|
Optogenetics. Classification: lcc rc481 .d45 2021 (print) \| lcc rc481
(ebook) \| ddc 616.89/14--- dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2020026946 LC ebook record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2020026947 Ebook ISBN 9781984853707
randomhousebooks.com Book design by Simon M. Sullivan, adapted for ebook
Cover design: Christopher Brand Cover image: KTSDESIGN/ Science Photo
Library/ Getty Images ep_prh_5.7.0_c0_r0

OceanofPDF.com

Contents Cover Title Page Copyright Epigraph Prologue

Chapter 1: Storehouse of Tears Chapter 2: First Break Chapter 3:
Carrying Capacity Chapter 4: Broken Skin Chapter 5: The Faraday Cage
Chapter 6: Consummation Chapter 7: Moro Epilogue Dedication
Acknowledgments Notes Permissions/Credits About the Author

OceanofPDF.com

I offer you the memory of a yellow rose seen at sunset, years before you
were born. I offer you explanations of yourself, theories about
yourself, authentic and surprising news of yourself. I can give you my
loneliness, my darkness, the hunger of my heart; I am trying to bribe
you with uncertainty, with danger, with defeat. ---Jorge Luis Borges,
"Two English Poems"

OceanofPDF.com

PROLOGUE After sound, light and heat, memory, will and understanding.
---James Joyce, Finnegans Wake

I

n the art of weaving, warp threads are structural, and strong, and
anchored at the origin---creating a frame for crossing fibers as the
fabric is woven. Projecting across the advancing edge into free space,
warp threads bridge the formed past, to the ragged present, to the
yet-featureless future. The tapestry of the human story has its own warp
threads, rooted deep in the gorges of East Africa---connecting the
shifting textures of human life over millions of years---spanning
pictographs backdropped by crevassed ice, by angulated forestry, by
stone and steel, and by glowing rare earths. The inner workings of the
mind give form to these threads---creating a framework within us, upon
which the story of each individual can come into being. Personal grain
and color arise from the cross-threads of our moments and experiences,
the fine weft of life, embedding and obscuring the underlying scaffold
with intricate and sometimes lovely detail. Here are stories of this
fabric fraying in those who are ill---in the minds of people for whom
the warp is exposed, and raw, and revealing.

• The bewildering intensity of emergency psychiatry provides a context
for all of the stories in this volume. If such a setting is to
illuminate the shared fabric of the human mind, disrupted inner states
should be rendered onto the page as faithfully as possible. So here,
symptom descriptions from patients are unaltered and real, to reflect
the essential nature, the true timbre and soul, of these
experiences---though to maintain privacy, many other details have been
changed.

Likewise, the powerful neuroscience technologies described---which
complement psychiatry by providing a distinct way of looking into the
brain ---are also entirely real, despite their sometimes
science-fiction-like and decidedly unsettling qualities. As depicted
here, these methods are drawn unchanged from peer-reviewed papers out of
laboratories around the world, including my own. But even medicine and
science are inadequate alone to describe the human internal experience,
and so some of these stories are told not from the point of view of a
doctor or a scientist but from a patient's perspective ---sometimes in
the first or third person, sometimes with altered states reflected by
altered language. Where another person's inner depths---their thoughts
or feelings or memories---are depicted in this way, the text reflects
neither science nor medicine, but only a reaching out of my own
imagination, with care and respect and humility, to create a
conversation with voices I have never heard, but only sensed in echoes.
The challenge of trying to perceive, and experience, unconventional
realities from the patient's perspective is the heart of psychiatry,
working through the distortions of both observer and observed. But
inevitably the true innermost voices of the departed and the silenced,
the suffering and the lost, remain private. Imagination here is of
uncertain value, and none is asserted, but experience has revealed the
many limitations of modern neuroscience and psychiatry in isolation.
Ideas from literature have long seemed to me just as important for
understanding patients---at times providing a window into the brain more
informative than any microscope objective. I still value literature as
much as science in thinking about the mind, and whenever possible I
return to a lifelong love of writing---though for years this love was
only a banked ember, covered with science and medicine, like drifts of
ash and snow. Somehow three independent perspectives, psychiatry and
imagination and technology, together can frame the conceptual space
needed---perhaps because they have little in common. Along the first
dimension is the story of a psychiatrist, told through a progression of
clinical experiences, each centered on one or two human beings. Just as
when a fabric frays, its hidden structural threads can be revealed (or
when a bit of DNA mutates, the original functions of the

damaged gene can be inferred), the broken describe the unbroken---and so
each story underscores how the hidden inner experiences of healthy human
beings, and perhaps of a doctor as well, might be revealed by the even
more cryptic and shadowed experiences of psychiatric patients. Each
story also imagines the emerging human inner experience of emotions, in
moments of the world today and across millennia in steps along our
journey, past obstacles in our path that may not have been traversed
without compromise. This second progression begins with stories of
simple and ancient circuits for just being alive---the cells for
breathing, or for moving with muscles, or for creating the fundamental
barrier between self and other. That earliest, most primal boundary,
between each of us and the world---called ectoderm, a lonely fragile
layer thin as a single cell--- gives rise to skin as well as brain, and
so it is with this same ancient borderline that contact between human
beings is felt in all its forms, physical or psychological---across the
spectrum, from healthy to disordered social states. The stories move
among the universal feelings of loss and grief in human relationships,
to deep fractures in the basic experience of external reality that come
with mania and psychosis, and finally to disruptions encroaching even on
the inner self: the lost ability to feel pleasure in our lives as can
happen in depression, the lost motivation to nourish ourselves as in
disorders of eating, and even the loss of the self itself---with
dementia at life's end. Along this second dimension, the emotions of the
subjective inner world, we begin and end with imagination---whether in
stories of prehistory (feelings leave no fossils; we cannot know what
was felt in the past, and so we do not attempt to be evolutionary
psychologists) or of the present (since even today we cannot directly
observe another human being's inner experience). But where the
measurable effects of feelings are consistent across individuals---as
far as we can tell with carefully applied technology--- experimental
insight into the inner workings of the brain may develop. Along a third
dimension, each story reveals this rapidly emerging scientific
understanding, with clues from both healthy and disordered states,
supported by experiments and driven by data. Brief references, for
background on the science within each story, are included in Notes at
the end of the book; some curious readers might wish to wander therein,
along

various trails of personal interest. Many additional important
contributions are referenced from within each of these links (and so the
links serve primarily as initial stepping-stones, to support further
exploration)---but only citations in open-source format are listed in
this volume, to ensure availability for all. This final dimension is
thus a scientific axis---drawn to guide the public without scientific
training, people who deserve to grasp, and own for themselves, every
idea and concept here. This text, then, is not only about the
experiences of a psychiatrist, nor imagining the emergence of human
emotions, nor even the latest neurotechnology. Each of these three
perspectives acts only as a lens, each focused in a different way on the
central mystery of feelings in the mind, each providing a different view
of the same scene. It's not simple to fuse these disparate perspectives
together into a single image---but it is no more easy to be human, or to
become humanity---and the volume can, in the end, achieve a sort of
grainy resolution. Profound respect and gratitude is expressed here to
my patients, whose challenges have provided us with this
perspective---and to all whose inner suffering, known or unknown, has
been inextricably part of the long, dusky, desperate, uncertain, and
occasionally lovely tapestry of our shared journey.

• A word about myself, and my own path, may be helpful so that the
distortions of the narrator can be better known; I am---as are we
all---more subjective than objective, only a flawed bit of human optics.
In early life there was no hint that the particular path I was traveling
would lead to psychiatry---or that the journey would also wind through
the even less congruent realm of engineering. My childhood was set in an
ever-shifting context, from small towns to big cities, from the East to
the West to the middle of the North American continent and back again,
following my restless family---my mother and father and two sisters, who
like me all seemed to value reading above every other pursuit---as we
moved every few years to a new home. I remember reading to my father for
hours at a time, day after day, as we drove across the country from
Maryland to California; my own free moments were occupied mostly by
stories and poems---even while cycling to and from

school, with the book of the moment held perilously on the handlebars.
Though I read history and biology too, the imaginative uses of language
seemed more compelling to me, until I collided with a different kind of
idea that had been lying in wait along my path. Creative writing was my
first registered course in college, but that year I unexpectedly learned
from talking with my fellow students, and then in classes, how a
particular style of approaching life science---building understanding
from single cells, even for inquiry into the most complex larger-scale
systems---was helping to resolve some of the deepest mysteries in
biology. These questions had long seemed to be nearly intractable: how a
body could develop from a single cell, or how the intricate memories of
immunity could be formed and preserved and awakened in scatterings of
single cells drifting along blood vessels, or how the disparate causes
of cancer---from genes to toxins to viruses---could be unified in a
single cellbased concept, in a way that was useful, that mattered. These
diverse fields were all revolutionized by bringing small-scale elemental
understanding to large-scale complex systems. The shared secret for
biology, it seemed to me, was reaching down to the level of cells and
their molecular principles, while retaining perspective on the whole
system, the whole body. The inner feeling evoked in me by the prospect
of extending this simple cellular idea to the mysteries of the mind---of
awareness, of emotions, of the stirring of feeling by language---was a
pure and pressured delight, like Toni Morrison's "rogue anticipation
with certainty," that universal human state of restless joy upon
suddenly seeing a path forward. In talking with friends in our shared
dormitory (fellow students who were all, inexplicably, theoretical
physicists) over meals, I discovered this was a feeling shared by
cosmologists probing phenomena playing out over astronomical scales of
space and time. They too began by considering the smallest and most
elemental forms of matter, together with the fundamental forces guiding
interactions over tiny distances. The result was a process both
celestial and personal. The feeling was of synthesis and analysis,
together. Crucially for what came later, at around the same time I was
exposed to neural networks, a rapidly growing branch of computer science
in which actual memory storage needing no guidance or supervision is
achieved by

simple collections of units, each cell-like and elemental---things
existing in code, with only simple abstract properties---but connected
to one another virtually, by operation of the program. Neural networks,
as the name suggests, were inspired by neurobiology, but these ideas
were so powerful that this computational field would later spawn a
revolution in machine intelligence called deep learning, which today
uses large collections of celllike elements to reshape virtually every
area of human inquiry and information---including, returning the
original favor, neurobiology. Large groups of connected small things, it
seems, can achieve almost anything---if connected in the right way. I
began to consider the possibility of understanding something as
mysterious as emotion, at the level of cells. What causes powerful
feelings in the well or ill person, feelings adaptive or maladaptive? Or
more directly, what in fact are those feelings, in a physical sense,
down to the level of cells and their connections? This struck me as
perhaps the most profound mystery in the universe---rivaled only by the
question of the universe's origin, its reason for being. Clearly, the
human brain would be important in approaching this challenge, because
only human beings can adequately describe their emotions. Neurosurgeons
(I thought) had the most physical and privileged access to the human
brain; therefore, the logical path for me, the one that provided the
most direct approach to helping, healing, and studying the human brain,
seemed to be neurosurgery. So throughout graduate school and into my
medical training, I steered myself in this direction. However, toward
the final year of medical school, like all medical students, I was
required to complete a brief rotation in psychiatry, without which I
could not graduate. Until that point, I had never felt any particular
affinity for psychiatry; in fact I had experienced the field as
unsettling. Perhaps it was the seeming subjectivity of the diagnostic
tools available, or perhaps there was within me some unknown, even
deeper issue I had not addressed. Whatever the reason, psychiatry was
the last specialty I would have selected. On the other hand, my early
experiences with neurosurgery had been invigorating: I loved the
operating room, the life-or-death drama juxtaposed with meticulous
precision and attention to detail, the focus and intensity and rhythm of
suturing set against the high charge of arousal. And so it was

stunning to my friends and family, and to myself, when I chose
psychiatry instead. I had been trained to see brains as biological
objects---as they indeed are ---organs built from cells and fed by
blood. But in psychiatric illness, the organ itself is not damaged in a
way we can see, as we can visualize a fractured leg or a weakly pumping
heart. It is not the brain's blood supply but rather its hidden
communication process, its internal voice, that struggles. There is
nothing we can measure, except with words---the patient's
communications, and our own. Psychiatry was organized around the deepest
mystery in biology, perhaps in the universe, and I could only use words,
my first and greatest passion, to crack open a gate leading to the
mystery. This conjunction, once realized, reset my path entirely. And it
all began, as life-changing disruptions so often do, with a singular
experience.

• On the first day of my psychiatry rotation, I was sitting in the
nurses' station flipping through a neuroscience journal when, after a
brief commotion outside, a patient---a man in his forties, tall and
thin, with a sparse, bedraggled beard---burst in through a door that
should have been locked. In arm's reach, standing above me, he fixed his
gaze to mine---his eyes wide in fear and rage. My gut clenched as he
began to shout at me. Like any city dweller, I was no stranger to people
saying strange things. But this was no street encounter. The patient
appeared completely alert, not shrouded in a fog; his experience was
stable and crystalline, the hurt was bright in his eyes, the terror was
real. In a shaking voice that seemed to be all he had left, with
profound bravery, he was meeting the threat. And his speech---it was
creative in its agony, full of phrases used not for traditional meaning
but seemingly for their own sake, as communicative effects, with their
own grammar and aesthetic, self-contained. He was directly confronting
me---though we had not met before, he had an idea that I had violated
him---but was doing so with sounds as feelings, with their relationships
beyond syntax or idiom. He spoke a novel word that sounded like one in a
phrase of Joyce's I had read long ago: it was telmetale; this was
Finnegans Wake on the locked unit, as he told what was deeper than

skin or skull, than stem or stone. I sat agape, my brain rewiring as he
spoke. He evoked in me science and art together, not in parallel but as
the same idea, fused: with both the steady inevitability and the
uncontrolled blaze of a sunrise. It was shocking, it was unitary, it
mattered, and it brought my intellectual life fully together for the
first time. I later learned that he was suffering from something called
schizoaffective disorder, a destructive storm of emotion and broken
reality that combines the major symptoms of depression, mania, and
psychosis. I also learned that this definition mattered not at all,
since the categorization had little impact on treatment beyond simply
identifying and treating the symptoms themselves, and there was no
underlying explanation. Nobody could give answers to the simplest
questions regarding what this disease really was in a physical sense, or
why this person was the one suffering, or how such a strange and
terrible state had come to be part of the human experience.

• Being human, we try to find explanations, even when that quest seems
hopeless. And for me, after that moment, there was no turning back---and
the more I learned, no turning away. I formally chose psychiatry as my
clinical specialty later that year. After completion of four more years
of training and board certification in psychiatry, I launched a lab in a
new bioengineering department---at the same university, in the heart of
Silicon Valley, where I had been a medical student. I planned to treat
patients while also building tools for studying the brain. Perhaps new
questions, at least, could be asked. As complicated as the human brain
seems to be, it is only a clump of cells like every other part of the
human body. These are beautiful cells, to be sure, including more than
eighty billion neurons specialized for conducting electricity, each
shaped like a richly branched bare tree in winter ---and each forming
tens of thousands of chemical connections called synapses with other
cells. Tiny blips of electrical activity continually course through
these cells, pulsing along fat-insulated electrical-conduction fibers
called axons that together form the white matter of the brain, each
pulse lasting only a millisecond and measurable in picoamps of current.
This

intersection of electricity and chemistry somehow gives rise to
everything that the human mind can do, remember, think, and feel---and
it is all done with cells, which can be studied and understood and
changed. As was required for the modern ascendance of other fields of
biology (like development and immunology and cancer), new methods first
had to be enabled for neuroscience that would allow deeper cellular
understanding within the intact brain. Before 2005, we had no way of
causing precise electrical activity to happen in specific cells within
brains. To that point cellular-level electrophysiological neuroscience
had been largely limited to observation---listening with electrodes to
cells as they fired away during behavior. This was an immensely valuable
perspective in its own right, but we could not provide or take away
those firing events within specific cells to see how cellular activity
patterns might matter for the elements of brain function and behavior:
sensation, cognition, and action. One of the earliest technologies
developed in my laboratory beginning in 2004 (called optogenetics) began
to address this limitation: the challenge of causing or suppressing
precise activity in specific cells. Optogenetics begins by transporting
foreign cargo---a special kind of gene---as far as imaginable in
biology: from the cells of one major kingdom of life all the way to the
cells of another. The gene is just a piece of DNA that directs its cell
to produce a protein (a small biomolecule designed for certain jobs in
the cell). In optogenetics we borrow genes from diverse microbes such as
bacteria and single-cell algae, and deliver this alien cargo to specific
brain cells of our fellow vertebrates like mice and fish. It's a strange
thing to do---but with a certain logic, for the particular genes we
borrow (called microbial opsins), upon delivery to a neuron, immediately
direct the creation of remarkable proteins that can turn light into
electrical current. Normally these proteins are used by their original
microbial hosts to convert sunlight into electrical information or
electrical energy---by guiding movement of the free-swimming algal cell
to the optimal level of light for survival, or (in certain ancient forms
of bacteria) by setting up conditions for harvesting energy from the
light. In contrast, most animal neurons normally do not respond to
light---there would be no reason to, as it is quite dark inside the
skull. With our optogenetic approach (using genetic tricks to produce
these exotic microbial proteins only in specific subsets of neurons

in the brain, but not others), those brain cells newly endowed with
microbial proteins become much different from their neighbors. At this
point the modified neurons are the only cells in the brain able to
respond to a pulse of light delivered by a scientist---and the result is
called optogenetics. Because electricity is a fundamental currency of
information in the nervous system, when we send in laser light
(delivered through thin fiberoptics, or with holographic displays that
project spots of light into the brain) and thereby change the electrical
signals flowing through these modified cells, remarkably specific
effects on animal behavior result. Discovered in this way are the
targeted cells' capabilities for giving rise to mysteries of brain
function, like perception and memory. These optogenetic experiments have
proved so useful in neuroscience because they allow us to link the local
activity of individual cells to the global perspective of the brain.
Tests of cause and effect now play out in the right context; only cells
within intact brains can give rise to the complex functions (and
dysfunctions) underlying behavior---just as individual words only matter
for communication within the context of their sentence. We do this
mostly in mice, rats, and fish: animals with many nervous system
structures in common with us (structures that are just quite a bit
scaled up in our lineage). Like us, these fellow vertebrates sense, and
decide, and remember, and act---and in so doing, if observed in the
right way, they reveal the inner workings of brain structures that we
share. And so a new approach to investigating the brain has emerged,
with methods that recruit tiny and ancient achievements of evolution to
work for us--- borrowed from forms of life that diverged from our own
lineage almost at the very beginning, at the earliest and deepest anchor
of the warp of life itself. A subsequent technology my team developed,
also inspired by this principle of cellular resolution in intact brains,
is called hydrogel-tissue chemistry (which we first described in 2013,
in a form called CLARITY; many variations on this theme have emerged
since). In this approach, tricks from chemistry are used to build
transparent hydrogels---soft water-based polymers---within cells and
tissues. This physical transformation helps turn an intact structure
like the brain (normally dense and opaque) into a state that allows
light to pass freely, which in turn allows high-resolution

visualization of component cells and their embedded biomolecules. All
the interesting parts remain locked in place, still within 3-D tissue,
evoking images of childhood treats---clear gelatin desserts with
embedded bits of fruit that can be seen deep within. A theme common to
both optogenetics and hydrogel-tissue chemistry is that we can now
observe the brain intact, and study the components that give rise to
function, without disassembling the system itself, whether in health or
in disease. Detailed analysis, always an essential part of the
scientific process, can be carried out within systems that remain whole.
The excitement resulting from these technologies (and diverse
complementary methods) has spread beyond the scientific community---and
helped give rise to national and global initiatives to understand brain
circuitry. By taking this approach---and integrating technological
advances from other laboratories as well, in microscopy, genetics, and
protein engineering ---the scientific community has now obtained many
thousands of insights into how cells give rise to brain function and
behavior. For example, researchers identified specific axonal
connections projecting across the brain (like warp threads embedded in a
tapestry, entwined with countless other crossing fibers) through which
cells in the frontal parts of the brain reach deep into regions that
govern powerful emotions like fear and reward seeking, and help restrain
behaviors that would otherwise turn these emotions and drives into
impulsive action. These findings were made possible because specific
connections defined by their origin and trajectory through the brain
could now be precisely controlled---in real time, at the speed of
thought and feeling, during the complex behaviors of animal life. These
deeply embedded axons help define brain states and guide expression of
emotions. By grounding our understanding of inner states at the level of
precisely defined physical structures in this way, we also obtain a
concrete perspective on the past, on our evolution. This insight emerges
since these physical structures were formed during our early development
and infancy by the operation of our genes, and genes are what evolution
has worked with in shaping human brains over the millennia. So our inner
threads, in some sense, project across the time we have inhabited as
well as across the space within us---a legacy anchored in humanity's
prehistory, needed by our forebears to survive.

This connection to the past is not magical---this is nothing like
"collective unconscious" communication, in the way that Carl Jung
invoked mystical connections with distant ancestors across time---but
arises from brain-cell structure, a physical heritage from our
predecessors. Beings that by chance created the first early forms of
these connections we possess (and study) today---with some variation
from individual to individual---were likely to have survived and
reproduced more effectively, and as a result, they passed the genes
governing that brain-structure predisposition down to us, and to other
mammals in the modern world. So we do feel what our ancestors likely
also felt---not just incidentally, but at times and in ways that
mattered greatly to them. These inner states were bequeathed to us
through the relentless will (and sometimes good fortune) of their
survival---giving rise to humanity, with our feelings and our failings.

• The promise of modern neuroscience even extends to the prospect of
addressing human frailty and easing human suffering: from guiding
therapeutic brain-stimulation methods with our newfound knowledge of
causation (what actually makes things happen, with cellular precision)
in brain circuits, to discovering the roles in brain circuitry of genes
that are linked to psychiatric disorders, to simply stirring hope in
long-suffering and long-stigmatized patients. So scientific progress has
deeply informed clinical thinking---this is the value of basic research,
nothing new though wonderful still---but my perspective is also
inverted, in that clinical work has just as powerfully guided my
scientific thinking. Psychiatry has helped drive neuroscience in
return---and this is enthralling to consider: the experiences of
suffering human beings, and thoughts about mouse and fish brains, are
informing each other. Neuroscience and psychiatry are pulling together,
bootstrapping, connected at a deep level. In light of these developments
over the past fifteen years, it is interesting to reflect on my initial
self-perceived lack of personal connection with psychiatry. So profound
was the impact of my first unexpected encounter on the psychiatry
ward---the shouting, the fear, the vulnerability of experiencing a
terrifying reality through another's eyes---that I sometimes

wonder if I was by chance unwittingly prepared, already tuned, to be
positively affected in a particular way by that moment, which for many
people would have been, understandably, nothing more than a disturbing
encounter. Personal inspiration (like scientific discovery) can come
from unexpected directions, and so I now think of my course correction
in that moment as a kind of parable about the perils of prejudgment, and
the need for direct personal exposure to find true understanding of
almost anything human. There is another allegorical aspect as well, in
which the story of optogenetics provides a lesson for the broader
sociopolitical world on the value of pure science. Historical work on
algae and bacteria dating back more than a century was essential for us
to create optogenetics and gain insight into emotion and mental
illness---but this path could not have been predicted at the outset. The
story of optogenetics demonstrates, as transformations of other
scientific fields have before and will again, that the practice of
science should not become too translational, or even too biased toward
disease-related questions. The more we try to direct research (for
example, by concentrating public funding too focally in large projects
targeted to specific possible treatments), the more likely we are to
instead slow progress, and the undiscovered realms where ideas that will
truly change the course of science, of human understanding, and of human
health, will remain in shadow. Ideas and influences from unexpected
directions are not only important but essential---for medicine, for
science, and for all of us, in finding and following our trajectories
through the world. These days, I sometimes imagine seeking out that
schizoaffective disorder patient, with whom I shared that heart-pounding
first awakening, to sit down together for a quiet moment of
communion---though it has been a long time. A receptivity to the
improbable comes very close to the essence of illness on the
schizophrenia spectrum, and so he might not be at all surprised to learn
that his crossing of the threshold of the nurses' station that day could
have helped in its own way to advance psychiatry and neuroscience. In a
real sense, our conversation now could confirm for him, and for me, that
despite the depth of his suffering, from some angle, some perspective,
his warp aligns with all of ours, and blends completely into the shared
tapestry of the human experience, within which he is no more ill than
humanity itself.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 1

STOREHOUSE OF TEARS The lines are straight and swift between the stars.
The night is not the cradle that they cry, The criers, undulating the
deep-oceaned phrase. The lines are much too dark and much too sharp. The
mind herein attains simplicity. There is no moon, on single, silvered
leaf. The body is no body to be seen But is an eye that studies its
black lid. ---From Wallace Stevens, "Stars at Tallapoosa"

T

he story Mateo told could only be held in my mind if abstracted, if I
flattened the mental image like a collapsible gurney and slotted it in
among all the others I had seen. It helped me to not acknowledge how
long he had been suspended by his seatbelt in the flipped car, to not
consider the feeling of helplessness as his family died around him,
considering instead only an instant of time, a still. Or instead,
simplifying Mateo himself, I could reduce his dimensionality, the space
he occupied---in my own mind compressing flat his human texture into a
simple plane. Then I could bind his story together with others like it I
had heard or seen---together they became like a stack of old newspapers,
all borne together without individual features, fused in a rain of
tears. In this way suffering could be summarized as a tractable single
object of ten or ten thousand lives. I don't know why I can't cry, he
began, and when it was all told and bundled, it was not more, or less,
than any other ending of a human world. There is no formal protocol in
medical training to protect a doctor's exposed heart in these
particularly devastating moments. Physicians and nurses, warfighters,
crisis workers---they all come to learn defenses on their own, in order
to live among the extremes of human suffering. It is not just the
magnitude of the pain but also its incessance---the unrelenting descent

into the abyss, day after day, year after year---that without some
safeguard would be unsustainable. Our natural impulse is to connect
deeply and broadly with someone in a state of personal loss, to try
sensing inside our own minds a full and complex representation of the
other, to fully understand what the tragedy means. But in the extreme
context of horrific suffering, it can be helpful to instead narrow our
perspective to preserve empathy, finding a point to experience within
the broader tapestry of the patient's life, focusing on one spot of
interlocking threads creating local shape and color. It is important to
know that the full perspective is available, but feeling fully does not
make sense of tragedy---and depths of emotion do not seem to help us
with precision tasks in the agonal moment, whether performing an artful
lumbar puncture of the spinal column or a difficult psychiatric
interview to elicit inarticulable feelings. Our perspective widens when
it can, sometimes without warning---on the drive home, or among our
children with a sudden sob. Until then, out of view but always
accessible are the trajectories of the patient's threads with all the
scope of life and its dreams, from their anchors and origins, through
the journeys and relationships that came together in that instant of
catastrophe and strife. Each tragedy is still felt intensely, and each
suffering human being is held in the heart carefully no matter how many
more come over the years--- every stunned and bereft father after a car
accident, every mother struggling to form words as she hears her child's
brain cancer diagnosis. And care is needed; when the cases accumulated
are still few, early in the life or training of a doctor (and sometimes
still later), a single experience can storm and overwhelm the inner
self, in the part of us that sees and feels representations of human
beings, textured images of valued others, positioned carefully like
tapestries in the innermost fire-lit halls, the hidden spaces of the
self. In the keep, if we were castles.

• I should have been better prepared, but there had been no warning that
the keep was vulnerable. Until meeting Mateo (in my role as the on-call
senior psychiatry resident who was summoned to the emergency room to
evaluate him), I had not been hurt badly by my own empathy for years,
not since I

had been a raw and young medical student. But all had been different
back then---my feelings were mostly only feelings in medical school, not
feelings about feelings, a safer form they achieved later. And as a
medical student I had been more vulnerable: coming of age in the halls
of medicine, not yet able to give orders nor to prescribe, and still
learning the language of the field though raising a child of my own as a
single father in the world beyond. On that night that hurt me first and
deepest, years before meeting Mateo, I was the medical student on
pediatrics at our children's hospital, on a call night that had not been
too busy. My first task for the evening---a brief prelude for what was
to come later that night---had been admitting and taking the history
from a cystic fibrosis family. The patients were threeyear-old twins
brought in together for respiratory distress. It was hard for the
children to breathe. The family was well known to the service, as we
say. There had been many past admissions to the hospital, and the
parents were pros at the process---so much so that they answered my
questions as soon as I began to ask them, so much so that they were in
the process of divorce. They had found, with the birth of the twins,
what seemed to be a hidden flaw in their union. In most cystic fibrosis
families, parents have no symptoms themselves, but each carries one copy
of a mutant gene. Mammals have two copies of almost every gene, so often
if a single gene is damaged, no ill effects are seen; the other copy can
allow a healthy life. Mother and father are healthy carriers in cystic
fibrosis, with the load carried not usually known until their child is
born with a far heavier burden ---both damaged copies of the gene. The
math is simple, and I learned that night that the parents, in their own
relative youth, had arrived together at a seemingly simple and practical
decision to split and remarry, each to seek a noncarrier and the promise
of greater health in the family. But in the meantime, before this
defiance of the blind forces of population genetics could play out, I
had to work through the mucousy tumult of the sick and screaming twins,
patiently building my inventory of facts, collecting their medical
history above the din, and completing the admission. By midnight, quiet
had finally been restored when we got wind of a late emergency transfer
arriving from an outside hospital: a four-year old girl, Andi, with a
brainstem finding.

I would carry this one, and what came next, with me for years: a deep
gouge, perhaps deeper than I know still. Perhaps it went all the way
through. I helped admit Andi to our inpatient service---she was charming
and moony in a high ponytail, kneeling on her hospital bed, arranging
her dolls around her, eyes just a little crossed up, one turned a bit
inward. It had been almost beneath notice as she played catch with her
family earlier in the evening, a detail almost lost in the special
thrill of staying outside later than usual---just a little double vision
in the twilight, and then just a twinge of worry. I found myself in deep
very quickly, even though I was the least important part of a small
collection of people brought together by the case, all crammed together
in the team workroom of the inpatient unit. I had started the meeting
leaning against a wall, and it immediately became impossible to consider
sitting down, or even to shift weight from one cramped leg to the other,
as the emotional impact of the scene manifested before me. I was frozen
in place until we were most of the way to dawn. A lone gray rectangle of
film, the brainstem scan, had been brought by the parents---clutched and
hated, their ticket to ride from the outside hospital deep in the
valley. They had borne the scan through the evening to the windowless
team room, and it was now jammed up on the lightbox, a backlit gray
requiem. Andi's parents, eyes red with latent tears, were across from
me---seemingly transposed into a separate space, somehow alone in the
crowded room. The doctor of record---the pediatric neuro-oncology
attending---was positioned immediately to my left, sitting down and
leaning forward. He had been paged and brought in, as late as it was,
not to perform a procedure, nor to make a clinical decision---there was
nothing to do that night---but to explain the conclusions from our
physical exam, and from the reading of the film, to the family. Words
were the only tool for the neurologist that night. He leaned forward for
hours, not relaxing back once, without a glance at me or anyone on the
team, his words only for two in the crowded room, for mother and father,
for two alone, all through the night. The double vision was not a
mystery to us. There was a finding on the scan. A shadow had fallen
across her pons. At the stem of the brain, at the base of the skull,
there is a bulge of cells and fibers called the pons---dense and vital,
connecting all that makes us

human in the brain above to the spinal cord and nerves that leave the
skull below. If within the pons---Latin for bridge---a disruption has
appeared in the path of fibers passing through, physicians can see this
happening without a CT scan or an MRI: no medical imaging, just human
imaging, just looking into the eyes of the human being. Andi's eyes were
crossed, but with only one turned inward, toward her midline---because a
tiny muscle on the side of her left eye globe (called the lateral
rectus, for its task of turning gaze out laterally, tracking a baseball
thrown wide) had failed. The fine shred of muscle was no longer
receiving instructions from the brain; its dedicated channel of
communication, its nerve, had fallen silent. The sixth cranial nerve (of
the twelve that emerge from the skull) is called the abducens, and is
beloved by confused medical students for its unusually straightforward
trajectory (compared with the other winding and branching and crossing
cranial nerves). Abducens, the simple sixth, is one nerve serving one
muscle, the lateral rectus muscle with its one job--- abducting the eye.
The abducens lies entirely on one side of the brainstem, its threads
coursing deep through the heart of the pons, carrying out their singular
duty. But now, tonight, abducens was playing another role, reporting
back on something unnatural in the brainstem, telling a tale of a thing
gone wrong--- and on the film, confirming the diagnosis, we could see
that a form, a darkness, lay across the bridge. The neuronal threads on
one side of the bridge were disrupted, and so the eyes no longer turned
together, were no longer aligned toward their common goal. This
coordination between eyes is a lovely thing when it works, when they
join to face the world together in primates like us. Both receive the
same instruction from the brain, to follow the ball thrown from Dad in
the darkening chill. But the two eyes, each with slightly different
shapes and angles, are not connected to each other. Much has to be
perfectly tuned for the two to move together, to not create double
vision with offset views of the same scene. This challenge is especially
pleasing to bioengineers, as a paradigm of the need for design. Such
synchrony and symmetry in biology, when achieved, imply trust, and
truth, and health. Two sensors, two eyes, are balanced together on the
finest edge of time. There are always failures of

communication in biological systems---noise, variance, chaos, there is
even sometimes profit in deception---so every system needs feedback to
check and to calibrate. Early in life, before we become aware, double
vision serves as that error signal sent back---and then our brains mend
the error, adjusting the instructions transmitted down cranial nerves to
the eye muscles, aligning and tuning with care, until the offset
disappears, and we see the world as one. The world becomes whole, until
a falsity returns in some---it was here tonight in this little girl, and
here it could never be trued. When a member of this pair slips
infinitesimally, an intruder is revealed, and a sickness known; the
nerve fibers through the pons become more and more disrupted, as the
shadow spreads. Here it could have been no other cranial nerve, it was
abducens, sixth nerve of twelve; in this brainstem cancer, it is always
the sixth: alert and direct, a border division reporting without fail
the first faint hoofbeats of invasion. The attending was careful to give
no firm prognosis that night, though I had paid enough attention in
class and on rounds to know that a death march had begun. This was DIPG,
a diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma, and she would have six to nine
months of life. Her parents were sensing this but not knowing, not
getting numbers but feeling the unraveling as a new reality took hold,
as a fibrous invader insinuated itself throughout their inner worlds,
entangling their every thought and sensation down to the feeling of
breath, of life itself. Their words were dry, and strangled, and dragged
thick from their throats. I knew what was far worse, what they could not
suspect then. I knew what kind of death would come. Within a few months
Andi would be unable to speak, unable to move---paralyzed with her eyes
wide open, still as bright and alert and perceptive as she was that
night. Locked-in---a state of straight nightmare---as the bridge fell,
as all her pons gave way. So quickly, all had turned. Just a visit to a
local doctor, for double vision in their little girl, on a weekday
night. My own first child was nearly the same age, almost four, though
it was hard to consider that fact in my mind for more than a moment.
That night, every time that thought came forward it was shut down
fearfully by some other process inside, with the feel of a heavy gate
slamming shut. A crude and immature defense, as I recognized even
then---don't look, don't connect---but temporarily effective.

In the days that followed, a new kind of grief made itself known to me.
As I learned to hold open that gate just a crack, just enough to let a
little light pass through, just enough to see Andi's connection to my
son---and to glimpse in this way, so far beyond what I could fully
imagine, the grief of her parents---as I did, angry tears would come as
I felt a nonsensical anger at the disease entity, a rage that DIPG was
part of our world. There had to be hope to defeat this malevolence;
there had to be hope for Andi. At my lowest, an unexpected thought
appeared in my mind, seeded by this child, nurtured by this anger---that
some could live this way, but I could not. I could not last in medicine,
not for a lifetime of this. I would retreat instead, to havens dumb---to
the lab, I told myself---the harbor of science I knew so well, a place
where no girls die. Yet with time this storm, of grief and anger and
false hope and retreat, spent its energies. New experiences surged to
the fore of thought and feeling. I healed---but still immaturely,
walling off the hurt gradually, as an abscess forms to seal off an
infection. With time I just stopped hoping; all I could think was that
the world needed more than hope from me. There was nothing to do for
Andi. With DIPG there was no surgery that could find its way safely in
and around the fibers of life and breath and motion in the pons, and no
chemical or radiation had lasting power. I was no more able than her
parents to protect her from what had come, cloaked in the phantasmal
darkness of the brainstem, in stealth under skull and skin, and under
the thin membrane still cradling her brain. Pia mater, we call that
membrane. The loving mother. When I stopped hoping, my tears stopped. I
focused outward, on the homely details that form our lives. I rotated
off pediatrics, never seeing Andi again. It was not bearable but borne,
her end is known but not seen, and she is kept in me now.

• Still today, those feelings reach throughout almost every part of
me--- stopping now before tears. That inner state is always there, ready
to return, although the emotion is gentler and more complex now; the
world has changed, and I have changed. There are more representations of
others deep inside me, interconnected with Andi, and supporting her.

Those memories are now also textured with the progress of science, and
with development of the method of optogenetics that allowed me to peer
into the brain's inner workings, to explore how internal states of
emotion are constructed at the level of cells, and to test how these
elements of construction matter. This method works by re-creating a part
of one organism's design within another living being, in a way that
allows this new part to persist in the recipient, and to be integrated
into the whole. The part, a gene, then influences action in the host by
providing a new code of conduct---just as an insight or novel experience
can do. It is common in biology for one organism to cross the boundary
into another---sometimes spontaneously, sometimes by design. It can be a
single cell that comes across the frontier, bearing only life's
universal essence--- DNA, a genetic program, a living acid---within a
thin lipid cover, borne lightly across the border on this frail life
boat. This is the story of life on earth, and it happens every which
way. Especially when the distance is far and barriers formidable, the
opportunity is great for those on both sides of the border. Every plant
and animal on earth, and thus every human being, owes its life to such
travelers from a foreign kingdom---members of an ancient class of
microbes called archaebacteria---who brought the mysterious skill of
using oxygen for energy when they traveled into, and dwelt within, our
cellular forebears more than two billion years ago. Were the travelers
invaders, entering by breaching the barrier, seeking to consume and
destroy? Or were our own genetic ancestors the aggressors, hunting and
absorbing, enveloping the smaller free-living supercharged oxygen
burners? In the end it is topology that matters, not intent. What is of
consequence is that an entity has passed across the border. The
migration is risky for both, but when the larger organism learns from
the smaller, retaining rather than destroying, then the perilous border
crossing can instead give rise to a new kind of being. In the case of
our lineage, we were brought the breath of life itself. Suddenly living
together, the two kinds of life had to coevolve if they could, mutually
accommodating each other's limitations and oddities. There was time
enough to sort it out, hundreds of millions of years---as long as the
union was not immediately catastrophic---time for the new joint being to

evolve, following the same Darwinian selection rules that gave rise to
life itself, and that had allowed each part, each partner, to arise
alone at first. Subcultures can be preserved in union. The small oxygen
burners became our mitochondria, the energy factories for each cell. So
ancient in origin that they use a different dialect of life's DNA code,
they have kept their mother tongue for private use over billions of
years of living together with us. At the same time the microbes adapted
themselves to our culture in countless other ways for the shared goal of
survival. And we adapted as well, coming to need the burners as
absolutely as they need us---they have become part of us now, and we
will never be apart again. These microscopic migrations, from microbe to
animal, or microbe to plant, are globally significant. These transitions
can change the overall flow of energy on the planet, sun to plant to
animal, and so change the landscape of earth. Many times these
migrations have happened, and some have persisted. Though the success
rate is infinitesimal, the universe has had billions of years to work
with---and over that time, low probabilities become certainties. But in
the last fifteen years, taking a shortcut through human hands with
optogenetics, microbial DNA has yet again returned to animal cells. The
microbial genes are targeted not to our bodies but to cells of animals
in the laboratory---and not spread across kingdoms through chance
encounters, but rather guided by scientists who accelerate this
information transfer, spanning immense genetic and conceptual spaces,
bridging the branches of the tree of life. Today, seeking to control
brain cells with great precision---in order to discover how the brain's
wonderful workings arise from pulses of electrical activity in
cells---we supplant the random hand of evolution. Not wanting to wait a
billion years, we put certain genes from another ancient DNA data
stream---still persisting in microbes of the natural world---directly
into mammalian neurons. We do this to take advantage of a distinct
alchemy that this different class of microbes developed---turning not
oxygen, but rather light, into energy and information---via specialized
genes (called microbial opsins) that allow conversion of light into
ionic current flowing through the surface membrane of a cell. And ion
flow, the movement of charged particles, happens to be the natural
signal for activation and inactivation of neurons.

Most neurons don't normally respond to light like this, but all they
need to do so, it turns out, is a single foreign gene---a microbial
opsin. And with a few more components from human
experimentalists---genetic tools to put the opsins into specific kinds
of cells to be tested (so only those respond to light while all the
others remain unchanged), and special light-guidance tricks for sending
in laser light (via fiberoptics or holograms, to bring the light only to
certain cellular structures)---optogenetics was created. In this way we
can elicit electrical activity directly in neurons by sending light from
a distance into animals carrying out complex tasks of life, just as a
conductor brings forth music from the orchestra. If brain function is
the music---sensation, cognition, action---then brain cells are
musicians tenmillionths of a meter wide, numbering in mammals from
millions to billions. Optogenetics is the conducting of activity in
neural circuits using light, eliciting a music of the natural world, an
animal performing to its design, with form and function together arising
from the individual cells and cell types in the brain. Optogenetics
brought together these two patients of mine---a little girl and a young
man, Andi and Mateo---linking like two notes of a minor chord these two
human beings who had come to me for help, each with a disease that had
disrupted a different natural inner harmony at nearly the same tiny
spot, deep within the most ancient region of the mammalian brain.

• "Why am I here tonight?" Mateo asked. He took his glasses off and set
them carefully on the gurney. "Because I don't know why I can't cry."
Looking at his hands, open in his lap, he considered each palm in turn,
seemingly puzzled by its emptiness. Then his eyes came back up to mine,
and his story began to slowly drain out, passively, by force of gravity.
He had been brought to the ER by his three brothers, who were surging
about in the tiny waiting room down the hall. With my first take, on
stepping into the room, he had seemed childlike---just twenty-six but
somehow looking even younger, with smooth skin and rich brown eyes
framed by thick black glasses, sitting all alone in Room Eight. He
looked as though he had lost his backpack, or perhaps was worried about
his homework. And yet that impression lasted only an eyeblink.

Eight weeks earlier, he told me, his wife of a year---his pregnant
bride--- had been crushed and killed in their car. She was stolen from
beside him late one night, as they drove in darkness on a country
highway. They were returning from a weekend getaway at a
bed-and-breakfast in Mendocino, when a white panel van had cut across
their lane. Mateo couldn't brake in time, the van loomed, death dilated.
In the last moment he fought as hard as any mammal could have. He jerked
the wheel hard left, and their little car flipped into the median,
finding a small tree stooped there that had been quietly waiting fifty
years for this moment. They hung upside down for an hour, Mateo
untouched, trapped beside his wife's broken body, the young family
swinging quietly in their seatbelts--- along with the little one too,
deep within her, cooling slowly along with her, unsafe in her soft
embrace. He stared at the wall now, arms empty. Two months later, there
was still visceral horror in his heart---but also a relentless dry
isolation. I don't know why I can't cry. Following his lead over the
next hour, I asked for more, learning about his life, his calling, his
immigration from Barcelona. He was an architect and a lover of chess; he
cried on his wedding day seeing his bride come around the path in the
outdoor garden, and again soon after--- when he learned she was
pregnant. Here was a man whose inner self, his emotions, had been
projecting out into the world---but his dimensionality was now reduced.
Even his phrases were flat and colorless. He seemed set aside, set apart
in time, sighted in one direction only. When I asked about his plans,
there was only nothingness. He could not see even a few minutes into the
future, which was invisible, impossible, a featureless white wall. As
blank as his future was, Mateo still suffered in great detail the
complexity of his past. A particular thread haunted him. Spinning,
churning, his brain was focused on a moment from years earlier, when he
had struck and killed a highly intelligent mammal, a raccoon---also on
the highway. He had been alone, barreling down the broad I-280 in the
early morning half-light, and the raccoon was there in the fast lane,
frozen, looking back at him. He did not turn then, confident in his
mass, his big machine, aware of the risk of swerving at that
speed---just rode it on through, for the good of all, and especially
since the call was his to make, the life his to take. The impact had
been only a moment, a thump. The

family was back home in the den waiting for warmth and food but it would
not come, not now, not ever. His car rode on, rode through, and brought
Mateo---Mateo alone---home. He earnestly tried to understand what had
happened. How much of what he had done earlier mattered later? He played
and replayed the moves of his life---did he have to swerve too hard with
his wife because he had not earlier, because he had not sought to spare
the life of another? His mind was occupied with unpiling past decisions
from each other, dissecting moves and links and connections---but it was
all now just insoluble rumination. He had left himself alone on the
board, a lone king, pointless, in stalemate. He wanted to pound the
earth, to demand of God to know why he was still here. I don't know why
I can't cry.

• Unexpected absence of tears in a bereft newlywed, unexpected presence
of tears in a young medical student---and all the other times when tears
surprise us: this complexity and subjectivity might seem inaccessible to
science. To even approach understanding of these mysteries, a scientist
might first seek a way to reduce, to simplify---to find a viewpoint that
cuts out the subjective and leaves something measurable. Yet here, the
whole and the essence seems to be subjectivity. Such a conundrum need
not be the end of seeking to explain; most modern fields of inquiry have
been, at some early point in their history, not readily welcomed into
the conversations and canons of science. New ideas are often consigned
to dwell on the outskirts for some time, yet eventually develop into
acceptable scientific discourse, as long as something interesting can be
measured consistently. For example, in one of the most recent and
spectacular of these transitions in science, we now know for certain
whether our species, Homo sapiens, mated with prehistoric hominins,
Neanderthals, with whom H. sapiens coexisted in Eurasia for many
thousands of years. The subject of speculation and romantic fiction only
a few decades ago, this question gave way in recent years to unequivocal
factual knowledge. Not only do we know that Neanderthal interbreeding
happened, but we also know exactly how much of modern Eurasian human
genomes arose from this interaction---about 2 percent. This

transition from fiction to science was due to the birth of a new kind of
measurement---in fact, a new field, named paleogenetics---that arose
from the marriage of technology (for DNA sequencing from fossil bones)
and human curiosity (embodied in the work of a few pioneering modern
genetics labs). Questions about who we are, and the nature of our
origins, are better posed now having taken the measure of that 2
percent. But still to be explored are many details (with some accessible
by DNA sequencing) of the drama and tragedy swirling around the African
and Eurasian cauldron of inter-hominin mating and extinction up to forty
thousand years ago---only fourteen hundred generations past, when the
last breath of a last Neanderthal was weakly drawn and without a sound
exhaled into the dank air of a hidden cave, alone in a final redoubt
near the coast of Iberia. And having taken this measure, paradoxically
the mystery of humanity's long march is not diminished by pairing a
question with an answer, and finding a number like 2 percent. Scientific
knowledge expands the scope of human imagination so that fantasy can
launch from deeper pilings of understanding in the bedrock of the
natural world, and reach further. Now on this same trajectory are other
recent arrivals to hard science---even the inner states of the mind,
like anger, and hope, and psychic pain---states we had known before only
by our own experience, as they come uninvited like light and weather, as
storms and dawns and creeping dusks.

• The scientific process almost always begins with measurement---and
inner states, though subjectively experienced, can have measurable
manifestations. As optogenetics experiments have shown, these
manifestations may find physical form arising from the trajectories of
axons, the threads that form the three-dimensional tapestry of the
mammalian brain. Exploring the threads of anxiety was an early example
of this kind of scientific advance. Anxiety is a complex state, with
features we know from introspection: changes in bodily function (heart
rate driven high, breaths coming fast and short), changes in behavior
(apprehension and skittishness---avoidance of risky situations even if
there is no immediate threat), and finally,

subjectively, a negative or aversive internal state (feeling bad, one
could say). Such utterly distinct features would, perhaps, have to be
generated by correspondingly diverse cells in the brain. Optogenetics
(along with other methods) illuminated how this complex state---so
familiar to most of us--- could be assembled and disassembled by
different cells and their connections across the brain. For each of
these components of anxiety (breathing rate, risk avoidance, and that
unpleasant internal feeling), different axonal threads that could be
responsible were discovered, and accessed, and controlled independently
with optogenetics. Here is how it was done. Imagine a spot deep in the
brain, a single anchor point, with many threads radiating out as if from
one beam of a loom to another, each stretched to connect with a
different target location across the brain. This is not unlike how
outgoing neural connections (in the form of axons) venture forth from a
single anxiety-control region, a deep brain structure called the
amygdala---even more precisely, from an extension of the amygdala called
the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, or BNST. These threads stretch,
and dive, and go deep to find the cells needed to make all the parts of
anxiety. One even goes to the pons, to the spot of Andi's shadow. Amid
all the interwoven intricacy of the brain, how can we know this--- that
these threads in particular actually matter? Here is where we can
introduce the genes from microbes, to provide a new logic to each
thread. Into quiet darkness under the skull, we deliver a new code of
conduct from a foreign being. We teach one connection, and then another,
and then another, to respond to light. We borrow a lone microbial gene
from single-celled green algae; this gene is just DNA instructions for
making a light-activated protein, called a channelrhodopsin, that lets
positively-charged ions into cells (which is an activating stimulus for
neurons, making them fire away, and broadcast their signals). We deliver
this gene into the mouse BNST, smuggling it in via a virus that we have
chosen for its aptitude at bringing DNA into mammalian neurons. The
cells in the BNST, having thus unwittingly received the algal gene,
begin to produce the algal channelrhodopsin protein as instructed---

duly following the DNA blueprint, the assembly manual written in the
universal genetic script of life on earth. At this point, if illuminated
with bright blue light, each of these BNST cells would fire action
potentials, the spiky signals of neuronal electrical activity (and the
light would be easy enough to provide, with a nearly hairthin fiberoptic
placed just right so that laser light sent through the fiber would shine
forth into the BNST). This would be a totally new capability, a new
language taught to animals by the algae, with our help. But in these
anxiety experiments, we actually don't bring in the light just yet. We
wait, and an even richer language emerges. Over several weeks, the
channelrhodopsin protein (which we have linked to a yellow fluorescent
protein, so we can see where it is produced and track its location)
fills up not only the cells in the BNST but also their threads as well,
the axons, which after all form part of each cell. Every neuron in the
BNST is built with its own outgoing axonal connection, and different
cells send their threads to different parts of the brain. After several
weeks, radiating out from the BNST like rays of the sun, yellow streaks
of the channelrhodopsin-linked fluorescent protein extend across the
dark secret interior to all of the brain regions that the BNST speaks
to, that need to hear a message from this anxiety center. Now the new
capability becomes clear. A fiberoptic can be placed not in the BNST but
in an outlying region---indeed, in each of the different regional
targets of the BNST across the brain. Laser light sent through such a
fiberoptic can then do something quite special. The only light-sensitive
part of each target region, upon which a yellow thread lands---for
example, the pons---is the set of axons from the BNST to that region.
And thus light delivered (to the pons, in this case, that deep and dark
pedestal of the brain stem) activates directly only one kind of cell in
the brain---the kind that lives in the BNST and sends axonal connections
to the pons. A single kind of thread in the tapestry, defined by anchor
and target, picked out from all the interwoven fibers, is now directly
controllable by light. When this is done in mice, a connection from the
BNST to the pons--- home of Andi's abducens and also home to a subregion
called the parabrachial nucleus, which is involved in breathing---was
discovered to control respiratory rate changes when activated, but had
no other effects that we could see. Stimulating this pathway
optogenetically affected

breathing rate as seen with changes in anxiety, but interestingly had no
effect at all on the other features of anxiety---the mice showed no
change in risk avoidance, for example. Instead, risk avoidance was
controlled by a different thread---the connection from the BNST to
another structure called the lateral hypothalamus (not nearly so deep as
the pons). Activating the cells of this pathway, using optogenetics,
changed how much a mouse would avoid exposed areas of an environment
(the middle of an open area---the most risky place to be, if one is a
mouse and vulnerable to predators), without changing anything else (for
example, no change in respiratory rate could be seen). Thus a second
feature of anxiety was picked out cleanly, defined by another cell type,
and we begin to see that different parts of inner states are mapped onto
different physical connections. What about that third feature of the
anxiety state, feeling bad? We call this negative valence---and its
opposite is positive valence (a good feeling, like that of sudden
release from anxiety, which feels to be much more than just absence of
negativity). At first glance, this aspect seems hard to assess,
especially in a mouse that cannot use words---and perhaps it would be
difficult also in people, where even words are imprecise and not fully
trustworthy. But still such an internal state---however subjective,
however experienced by a mouse---can have external measurables. In an
experimental test called place preference, an animal is free to explore
two similar connected chambers---just as if a human being had free rein
to explore a suite of two identical rooms in a new house. If the person
in such a situation were caused to feel acute and intense positivity
inside (like that inner rush of a wild kiss returned, somehow feeling
this without the kiss itself) immediately with every chance entry into
one of the rooms, which terminated immediately upon each exit from that
room, imagine how quickly that person would simply choose to spend every
possible moment in one room. A single measurable---choice of the room
with that feeling--- reports to an observer on the hidden internal
state. The observer cannot conclude precisely how it feels, of course,
only that it is of positive valence ---and a panel of additional tests
can confirm that interpretation. Negative valence is tractable too. If
the caused feeling is in that direction instead (inner negativity,
perhaps in the same sense as the sudden crushing loss of a

family member), then avoidance, instead of preference, becomes the
measurable. Valence can in this way be explored in animals, where
optogenetics provides a means to instantaneously test the impact of
activity in specific cells and connections across the brain. In the
mouse version of place preference, the animal is given free rein to
explore two similar chambers of an arena---first without optogenetic
input. Then, a laser is brought to bear, set up so that light is
delivered through a thin fiberoptic to the brain automatically, but only
when the mouse happens to be in one of the two equivalent chambers (say
the left-hand one). If there is an aversive, or negative, quality to
activity of the particular optogenetic target of the moment (the
specific neuronal thread that had been made light-sensitive in that
animal), the mouse rapidly begins to avoid the left-hand chamber. The
mouse, it seems, does not want to spend time in places associated with
negative experiences---nor would we. Conversely, if there is a positive
internal association, the mouse will spend more of its time in the
chamber linked to light---revealing place preference. Which thread deep
in the brain, winding its way out from the BNST, governs this important
feature related to anxiety---that of positive or negative valence,
perhaps corresponding to the subjective feeling of our own internal
state? Surprisingly, neither of the two other connections mentioned so
far, to pons or to lateral hypothalamus, governs this behavior from the
BNST. Instead, this job is handled by yet a third projection, from the
BNST to another spot that lies deep, almost to the pons but not quite---
the ventral tegmental area, or VTA, where neurons live that release a
small chemical neurotransmitter called dopamine. This group of cells
encompasses its own diversity of roles and actions, but overall is
intimately linked to reward and motivation. Activity along the other two
projections, to pons and lateral hypothalamus, does not seem to matter
at all to the mice---with stimulation affecting breathing and risk
avoidance but not positive or negative associations, at least as far as
the place-preference test is able to report. Even more strikingly, the
third thread, to VTA, does its job of place preference in mice (and
could therefore implement subjectivity in people) without affecting, in
turn, the other features---breathing rate and risk avoidance. Thus a
complex inner state can be deconstructed into

independent features that are accessed by separate physical connections
(bundles of threads defined by origin and target) projecting across the
brain. Not limited to the study of anxiety, this same approach turned
out later to be applicable to mammalian behaviors in general. Even the
complex process of parenting, in the form of intimate care of mammals
for their young, was soon deconstructed into component parts, mapped
onto projections across the brain. This discovery came from another
group of researchers five years later, using the same optogenetic
toolkit and projection-targeting approach. Many mysteries remained for
anxiety, of course. For example, this deconstruction of the anxious
inner state does not answer (though it strongly frames) a timeless
puzzle---the questionable value of having positivity or negativity of
internal states at all. The clean separability of place preference from
risk avoidance highlights a deceptively simple question: why must a
state feel bad (or good)? If behavior is already tuned and controlled
appropriately for survival---if risk is already avoided, as dictated by
the projection to the lateral hypothalamus ---what is the point of the
preference, or subjective feeling, provided by the connection to the
VTA? We think that evolution by natural selection works with actions
taken in the world---that what is actually done, rather than felt, by an
animal affects its survival or reproduction---and so perhaps how the
animal feels inside, or how we feel inside, should not matter if action
is already addressed. If the mouse is already avoiding the risky open
space, as it should for survival and as governed by the
BNST-to-lateral-hypothalamus thread, with no positive or negative
association at all, then what is the purpose of the separate VTA thread
and its associations? Feeling bad seems gratuitous---and more than that,
a vast and unnecessary source of suffering. Much of the clinical
disability in psychiatry, after all, arises from the subjective
negativity of states like anxiety and depression. One reason may be that
life requires making choices between utterly distinct categories that
cannot be compared directly. Subjectivity---feeling good or bad, for
example---may be a sort of universal monetary instrument for the inner
economy of the brain, allowing positivity or negativity from diverse
pursuits, from food to sleep to sex to life itself, to be converted into
a single common currency. This arrangement would allow difficult
category-crossing decisions to be made and actions chosen---quickly and
in

a way best suited to the survival needs of the particular animal and its
species. Otherwise, in a complex and fast-paced world, wrong calls will
be made: freeze when a turn is called for; turn when a stop is needed.
Perhaps these conversion factors are something that the evolution of
behavior works upon. Relative value (in the common currency of
subjectivity) assigned by the brain to different states will inevitably
determine consequential---indeed existential---decisions made by the
organism or the human being. But these currency conversions also must be
flexible, needing to shift over life and over evolution, as values
change--- and this flexibility could take physical form, such as changes
in the strength of threads connecting to valence-related regions like
the VTA. The insight that the optogenetic study of anxiety brought me
was that subjective value (positive or negative) and external
measurables (breathing ---or perhaps crying) could be added to or
subtracted from brain states with eerie precision. But this
understanding came years later for me, well after Mateo had entered and
left my life. At that time in the emergency room, I had no way of
knowing that separability of one element of an inner state could be so
precise, nor that this could happen as a result of the physical form
taken by that element (involving electrical activity traveling along a
connection from one part of the brain to another). Seeing Mateo, I had
no framework to understand how he could be unable to cry, as he normally
would---while lacking none of the other human elements of profound
grief.

• Still today, deep mysteries of our inner states remain outside the
reach of science. It can seem in poor taste to study love, or
consciousness, or crying. With good reason---if no objective and
quantitative tool (like paleogenetics for insight into Neanderthal
prehistory, or optogenetics for discovering principles of brain
function) yet exists, answers may lie beyond our grasp. In the case of
crying, a biologist should presume that if fluid is ejected from a duct
like those connected to our tear glands---with precise timing, and in
consistent contexts, for individuals of the species---there is likely an
evolutionary reason, and the matter is suitably objective for science.
If changes in duct performance come along with a strong feeling, a
subjective internal state, then the combination of subjective and
objective should

intrigue a scientist, a psychiatrist, or any student of the human mind
and body. Crying is significant in psychiatry. Our patients are
experiencing extreme emotions, and we work with these emotions---with
their articulation, recognition, and expression. We are experienced in
seeing the less genuine tears as well, across a spectrum of deception
from the mildly suffering and modestly manufactured, to fully
professional manipulative tears. Yet little is known in the science of
emotional tears, such as it is. Emotional crying cannot be studied well
in animals. Pure emotional tears, as we experience the phenomenon, are
not clearly present elsewhere even among our close relatives in the
great ape family; the reason, if any, is a mystery. Tears are powerful
for driving emotional connection; it is known that digitally altering
tears in human face images will cause significant changes in the
sympathy, and the impulse to help, elicited in viewers (much more than
for altering other facial features). But we are no more social than our
cousins---the chimpanzees, the bonobos---and still, using the mystery of
tears, we alone cry, and cry alone. We display our inner state with this
odd external signal, with or without audience, not requiring volition or
intent, just broadcasting feeling to all observers and ourselves. But it
is not only our great ape kin who seem excluded---even many of our own
Homo sapiens do not shed tears emotionally, and so dwell just a bit
apart. This separation may be one-way ---those whose bodies do not
generate the language still can understand and respond to emotional
tears in others---but missing even this one part of the conversation may
come at a cost; non-crying people have been found to show reduced
personal attachment patterns, though it's not known if this association
is more due to life experience or innate predilection. The fact that
this involuntary signal of emotional tears is absent from some human
beings and from our close nonhuman relatives may be a sign of an
incompletely established evolutionary innovation--- perhaps because its
value is not universal even today, or because it was a recent
experiment: an accident still in the process of manifesting fully in the
human family, or failing to do so. Every innovation in evolution is
accidental at first; perhaps emotional crying came about initially as a
chance rewiring of axons. Like the various projections from the BNST,
all axons are guided during brain development to grow in specific
directions by a vast diversity of path-

setting molecules as strong as thread guides on a loom---tiny signposts
that send a slowly growing bundle of axons on to the next brain region,
or turn it back if it has come too far, or send it across the midline to
the other side of the body. All of this, like everything in biology, was
built by chance mutation over millions of years and so can find its way
to new functionality by chance mutation as well. A mutation at any of
these steps---in any gene guiding the positioning of path-setting
molecules, and so redirecting those long-range threads, the axons,
across the brain---would be all it would take. Fibers coming from the
emotional areas of the brain would change course slightly, and then
there would be born into the world a new kind of human being, with a new
way of expressing feeling. Such innovations would have the potential to
open up a separate channel of communication---with remarkable
efficiency, considering that the actual biological changes needed to
implement this innovation would be very small: one set of axons missing
one guidepost and traveling just a bit too far during development. As
almost always is the case in evolution, the key players would have been
already present, just needing to be taught a new rule, and so create a
new role. In this case, the relevant axons---such as those already
traveling from forebrain areas like the BNST to deeper and ancient
brainstem areas like the parabrachial nucleus for breathing changes
---would have been just partially rerouted to a new destination. Near
the parabrachial nucleus lie the origins of two cranial nerves---not
only the sixth, named abducens, the one Andi's cancer disrupted, but
also its neighbor the seventh, called the facial nerve. All of these
structures, just collections of cells, sixth and seventh and
parabrachial, jostle together in a small spot in the pons, huddled on
the bridge from brain to spinal cord. But the new target here, for
tears, would be the seventh-nerve cells. For emotional expression, the
seventh is a maestro in itself, much more intricate and multipurpose
than abducens, sending and receiving rich information streams to and
from many muscles in the face and many sensors in the skin. The seventh,
the facial nerve, is grandmaster of facial expressions but also of the
lacrimal gland, the storehouse of tears. The lacrimal system likely
evolved for flushing irritants from the eye, washing away particulate
nuisances. Now, with almost trivial rewiring, it could be involuntarily
recruited by a flood of emotion, perhaps alongside

other fibers reaching to the breathing centers---the parabrachial and
beyond ---wrenching from within us the cathartic, diaphragmatic
contraction of the sob. When the first human being who had this mutation
cried, and perhaps even sobbed, what might have been the effect on those
nearby---friends or family or competitors---who had never seen this
before? Communication through the eyes would have long been important,
always a focus of attention for human beings---eyes are rich in
information and constantly accessed---so the innovation would have
landed fortuitously in real estate of high value for sending signals.
But there might have been at that moment no understanding, and no
emotional response, to the tears---just attention and interest to the
unusual and salient signal. Full meaning and value, for survival or
reproduction, may have taken generations to evolve. If there is
evolutionary significance of crying at all, then the times when
emotional crying occurs may provide clues. Largely not voluntary in
humans---this is a signal far less under our conscious control than, for
example, smiling or grimacing---crying is a mostly honest journalist,
reporting for some reason on a kind of feeling. Scholars have focused on
its value for social communication, but emotional crying also happens,
and feels important---even productive, addressing some need---when we
are alone. Given all the risks of revealing true feelings (and all the
individual benefits of successfully conveying false feelings, for beings
in complex social environments), the poor controllability of this
emotional readout seems at first a handicap rather than an
advantage---something to be selected against, rather than selected for,
at the level of the individual. Signaling to self, or to others---either
way, it is interesting that this signal has remained mostly involuntary,
and thus mostly true. Is crying still evolving, under selection
pressure, to either escape or come under our volition? We might
eventually control crying as easily as smiling, unless its involuntary
nature is more useful than individual advantages that would come from
voluntary control. And right now this truth-signaling property is known
broadly to the species in some sense, programmed in human observers to
be of greater impact than more easily gamed facial expressions like
smiling---thus heightening its effect on others, perhaps drawing fellow
human beings closer for bonding and support, perhaps in times of true
and desperate need.

In that case, a sort of joint evolution of two feeling-related
behaviors--- crying and the response to crying---may be occurring across
members of our species. This would be a code, an internal language of
shared importance to both the individual and the group, but still
gameable like anything in biology. Deception is always lucrative up to a
point, but if the deception is rare enough, the whole program of crying
and responding could retain value as a truth channel. For our species,
as well as for individuals, such a channel could have been favorable
once we became complex socially cognitive beings, capable of deception
and denial and with strong voluntary control over our
expressions---since if all emotional readouts can be gamed, then all
mean little, and social communication loses a great deal of value. Thus
an arms race between truth and deception ensues: pausing when cognitive
control (benefiting the individual who can achieve this control) is
finally attained over the new signal (which then loses its truth
property of some value to the species), and restarting a million years
later when a misguided axon pathway blunders unexpectedly into a new
patch of cells in the brain, perhaps those governing surface physiology
of the skin---resulting in blushing, crying, and whatever comes next.
Since emotional crying is evenly distributed across humanity, we can be
certain we did not acquire this trait from Neanderthals, who lent their
genomes chiefly to the Eurasian lineages. It is not known whether
Neanderthals shared this trait as well---most likely they would have, if
crying capability had emerged in a common ancestor that every human
being shares with them. The Neanderthals had stable social communities,
preserved their cultural traditions, took the time to paint symbolic art
even as they were dying out, and buried their lovely children. In my
imagination at least, they shed tears like ours, until the end.

• Mateo was not suicidal, but could be diagnosed with major depression.
I attached the label to him that night. Though it seemed an
oversimplification, among other defining symptoms of depression he had a
prominent hopelessness, expressed as an inability to look forward in
time. Without hope for the future, Mateo could only look back.

He never did cry for his family that night---not that I saw, nor that he
could ever tell me. In considering this, and the reasons we have for
crying, it seemed to me that an odd unity links tears of sadness, when
they happen, and the more mysterious tears of joy. Tears come when we
feel hope and frailty together, as one. I managed to keep myself from
writing this in the chart---or writing that Mateo had no hope left to
cry for. Mild improvements in material outcome that do not require a new
model of self and circumstance---as with just making a bit more money in
accord with known probabilities of the world---will not cause most
people to cry. But when we do cry for joy---as when we feel the sudden
warmth and hope of human connection at a wedding, or when we see an
unexpected depth of empathy in a young child---there may be a flicker of
hope for the future of the community, for humanity, against the cold. We
can cry at a wedding or a birth, seeing heartfelt aspiration but knowing
deeply the fragility of life and love: I hope that the joy I see here
will never die, I hope that the world will be kind enough to let this
last forever, I hope that these feelings will survive ---but I know very
well they may not. This seems to be a kind of anxiety, even for what we
think of as tears of joy, since a threat---though not immediately
present---is known, and felt. At the other, truly negative, pole of
value, tears of sadness in adult human beings similarly come not with
mild losses from known risks but with sudden adverse personal
realizations that must be addressed---like a shock of betrayal when the
hope we had for the future is shaken and our model of the world, our map
of possible paths in life (a map is hope), must be redrawn. When we cry,
even when the feeling is negative, hope may be present---with new
conditions, but it is hope nonetheless. Then we truthfully,
involuntarily, signal this fragility of our future, and the fact that
our model is changing, at the moment of realization---we signal this to
our species, our community, our family, and ourselves. Does evolution
really care about hope? As abstract as it seems, hope is a commodity
that must be regulated in careful ways by living beings--- metered out
in quantities only enough to motivate reasonable actions. Hope when
unreasonable can be harmful, even deadly. Every organism must ask in its
own way: when to struggle on, and when to save energy and reduce risk by
waiting out the storm? Rage or rest, fight or hibernate, cry or not---
all life needs to make such choices, to compute the harshness of the
present

world---and if the challenge cannot be overcome, to withdraw from the
fray. The circuitry of hope control needs to work, and work well. With
the high heat of our primate lifestyle---a quarter of our calories are
burned by the brain alone---the ancient circuitry of withdrawing from
actions may extend in our lineage to the giving up of hope itself, of a
sometimes costly conceit occupying our brains rather than our muscles.
Ancient and conserved circuits were already available to help our
evolution build this capability---even cold-blooded fish can make the
choice to meet adversity with passivity rather than with action. In 2019
cells were studied across the entire brain of the tiny zebrafish
(related to us as a fellow vertebrate, with a backbone and much the same
basic brain plan, but small enough and transparent enough to let us see
all the way through, using light to access most of its cells during
behavior). Two deep structures in the fish brain, called the habenula
and the raphé, were observed to work together in guiding this transition
from active to passive coping with a challenge (the passive coping state
is where the fish will no longer try to expend effort to meet a
challenge). Neuronal activity in the habenula (provided by optogenetics)
was discovered to favor passive coping (essentially not moving during a
challenge); in contrast, activity in the raphé (source of most of the
neurochemical called serotonin in the brain) favored active coping
(vigorous engagement with the problem). By optogenetically stimulating
or inhibiting the habenula, it was possible to instantaneously turn down
or up the simple likelihood of the fish expending energy to meet a
challenge--- and when the raphé was optogenetically controlled instead,
the coping effects observed were opposite to those seen with habenula
manipulation. Years earlier, optogenetics and other methods had
implicated these same two structures in mammals, in the same basic kind
of behavioral state transitions, and with the same directionality of
effect in each structure. Now seeing these results emerging in the
distantly related zebrafish, it could be said with confidence that the
biological foundation of suppressing action, when good outcomes are
nearly impossible, is ancient, and conserved, and powerful---and thus
likely to be important for survival. Any small animal can find a crevice
or a burrow and stop moving to cope passively with adversity. Even the
tiny nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans appears to calculate the
relative value of actively

foraging or remaining in place, with the full power of its 302 neurons.
But larger brains contemplate many more possible actions and outcomes,
ruminating and worrying, mapping out decision trees thickly ramified
with possibilities projecting far into the future. A passivity of
thought is also needed, perhaps---a deep discounting of the value of
one's actions, and also of one's own thoughts. Hope draws resources from
our attentional and emotional budgets, and perhaps it is best to save
the striving and the struggle, and to spare the trouble of tears when
hope is gone.

• That night in the ER, I had a hard time figuring out how to help
Mateo. The hospital was busy, and there was no room available for him.
As he was not suicidal and did not want to be in the hospital, I could
not easily admit him to our locked ward, but our open ward was full.
There were transfer possibilities to other hospitals, though after
talking it all over with Mateo and his brothers, we ended up sending him
home with them---and with an appointment for outpatient care, therapy,
and medication---but not before I took the time to carry out an hour of
predawn psychotherapy with him, right there in the ER, laying
groundwork. When we can, we often steal the time to do this in
psychiatry, almost instinctively, even during the besieged rush of an
on-call shift, even in cramped and awkward confines like Room Eight that
night. It can be hard to hold us back, as hard as it is to hold back
surgeons from cutting to heal; we all live, and move, in the crafts we
have built for ourselves. Without the right foundation, nothing works in
psychiatry. Without structural threads to weave upon, there is no new
pattern that can be created. As psychiatrists, our first instinct is to
start to link together what recovery will mean for that person---the
intertwined threads of the biological, the social, and the
psychological---not in a rush, but in awareness of the time that will be
needed to construct something strong and stable. We do this even if we
may never see the patient again, as I suspected that night; I was
discharging Mateo to the care of his family, and to outpatient
treatment. I would continue rotating on through the hospital, in my own
ecliptic path, while Mateo would follow his arc in the universe; in all
likelihood our paths would never intersect again.

But the amount of time I was taking was extreme, I realized after nearly
an hour had elapsed. It was not until the call shift ended, and I was
driving home with tears leaking from my eyes, diffracting the traffic
lights, that I saw a larger picture---and saw that it was also about
another human being, another patient. I took so long with Mateo that
night because I had been unready for him, for that particular hell, as I
had been only once before---and so the therapy was for myself as well,
for my own tears that were coming. A connection across time had been
formed in my mind. It was only with those tears that I saw the link with
Andi, who had brought me to the same place and for whom I had been just
as unready. Andi, the little girl from years ago with the brainstem
finding---long gone, on a journey none could share. This time, I had
thought I could do something---not much, but something. And that
matters---realizing at a place and moment you have been called to be
whatever it is that humanity can be for a person. That is not nothing.

• Years later, following our optogenetics and BNST anxiety work, an even
deeper connection between Andi and Mateo revealed itself. There was a
curious commonality to these patients, who represented the two lowest
moments that medicine had brought me to, from which I had to work
hardest to emerge. What had actually brought each of them to the
hospital the night I was on service had been fibers failing in virtually
the same deep spot of the nervous system. This spot was the base and
bedrock of the brain, in the pons, where eye movements and tears and
breathing are controlled, and where next-door neighbors in my patients
were disrupted---the fine chords, the sixth and seventh, of lost
harmony. But the significance of this, if any, I cannot define. I know
only that the site is deep, and old. The naturalist Loren Eiseley wrote
that a symbol "once defined, ceases to satisfy the human need for
symbols." Eiseley collected observations from the natural world and
recorded the ideas stirred in him by these images as symbols---like a
spider out of season, surviving in the dead of winter, having built a
web by an artificial source of heat, the globe of an outside

lamp. He was moved by this image, despite his near certainty that "her
adventure against the great blind forces of winter, her seizure of this
warming globe of light, would come to nothing and was hopeless....Here
was something that ought to be passed on to those who will fight our
final freezing battle with the void...in the days of the frost seek a
minor sun." Hope, represented by complex life fighting on in the face of
inescapable cold, moved Eiseley, and moves scientists and artists
similarly. It is close to the heart of what moves us to tears. For
Mateo, there was no hope left to cry for, now that his wife and baby
were gone. His lack of tears was also his blindness of the future. But,
in some form, I knew, or thought I knew, that he could love again, in
time. Hope was not dead, though he could not see this, and so the tears
came for me, and not Mateo. The true end of hope shows up only as
extinction, when the last member of a sentient species eases to the mud
alone. In the history of our lineage, this finality would have become
real many times over, in the fine lost branches of our greater family
tree. The Neanderthals and others, in the last traces of their last
days, lived out that tragedy for which all else is metaphor. Extinction
is normal. Each mammalian species, on average, gets a run of about a
million years, it seems---with a few close calls thrown in the mix until
it finally happens. So far, modern humans have lasted only about
onefifth of this interval---but already we have survived some mysterious
crises that can be inferred from human genomes, when effective breeding
population sizes around the world may have plummeted to a few thousand
individuals. Such demographic events alone could help explain the
prevalence of odd traits with little obvious value---behaviors somewhat
unrefined, having found (like crying) incomplete purchase in the
population due to only a mild benefit. When a species goes through a
population-size bottleneck--- where only a small fraction survives or
migrates---whatever traits were present in the chance survivors (or
migrants) then for some time enjoy outsize prevalence, whether or not
the traits were unusually important to survival. This could be the case
for crying emotional tears---and help explain the seeming uniqueness of
such a trait, among animals.

On the other hand, perhaps we needed this truth channel more than other
related species---in building ever larger and more complex social
structures over time. Crying could have come along as first just a
misrouted brainstem projection, but the responsible genetic variant
might have found purchase in the mingling populations of East Africa as
our modern lineage arose, when we used our fingers and brains to build
one another houses, constructing durable communities at great cost.
Perhaps tears were needed after we had grown too good at the last
forgery, at gaming the last signal of grimacing or keening. Builders
need solid ground; social builders need ground truth. The last
Neanderthal---a big-brained, bruising, nearly modern human, the last
member of a branch of our family tree that buried the lost with ritual
and care---died just an eyeblink ago, clinging until the end in caves
near what would become the Gibraltar seashore, in final retreats hidden
from, as Eiseley said, "the first bowmen, the great artists, the
terrible creatures of his blood who were never still." They may have
cried at weddings, at births--- but when the last starving Neanderthal
watched the last baby trying desperately to nurse, skin on skin but
fluid failing in the ducts...there was no hope left for doubt, there was
no future left to question, or to fear. There were no tears then, under
the moon without answers---just a dry streambed, set back from a salt
sea. OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 2

FIRST BREAK Horns of the long-lived stag began to sprout, The neck
stretched out, the ears were long and pointed, The arms were legs, the
hands were feet, the skin A dappled hide, and the hunter's heart was
fearful. Away in flight he goes, and, going, marvels At his own speed,
and finally sees, reflected, His features in a quiet pool. "Alas!" He
tries to say, but has no words. He groans, The only speech he has, and
the tears run down Cheeks that are not his own. There is one thing only
Left him, his former mind. What should he do? Where should he go---back
to the royal palace Or find some place of refuge in the forest? Fear
argues against one, and shame the other. And while he hesitates; he sees
his hounds, Blackfoot, Trailchaser, Hungry, Hurricane, Gazelle and
Mountain-Ranger, Spot and Sylvan, Swift Wingfoot, Glen, wolf-sired, and
the bitch Harpy With her two pups, half-grown, ranging beside her,
Tigress, another bitch, Hunter, and Lanky, Chop-jaws, and Soot, and
Wolf, with the white marking On his black muzzle, Mountaineer, and
Power, The Killer, Whirlwind, Whitey, Blackskin, Grabber, And others it
would take too long to mention, Arcadian hounds, and Cretan-bred, and
Spartan. The whole pack, with the lust of blood upon them, Come baying
over cliffs and crags and ledges Where no trail runs: Actaeon, once
pursuer Over this very ground, is now pursued, Fleeing his old
companions. He would cry "I am Actaeon: recognize your master!" But the
words fail, and nobody could hear him. ---From Ovid, "The Story of
Actaeon," Metamorphoses, Book III

n image can take root and grow. Here, it is of a young father with his
twoyear-old daughter in the 767, slowly banking harborward, nearing the
burning steel tower---it's a frame of the moment when he at last knows
the impossible truth, his pulse thudding thickly but she's calm amid the
chaos, because Daddy said there were no monsters. He's turned his
daughter's head firmly toward his own---she's a frail warm spot glowing
within an infinitude of cold---for a moment of silent communion before
their sublimation. A little girl and her father, searching each other
for grace as the plane roars into the second tower---this wordless image
became physical, sown across the world into the arable mind of a man
named Alexander, as he sailed through the Cyclades. Quickened,
germinating, the imagined scene gathered form--- investing all the soil
of his thoughts, insatiably drawing to itself all the fluid of his soul.

A

• The fundamental rules of Alexander's life had already been rewritten
just before September came, and so it may be that his brain---fallow for
decades--- was ready when the outside world was transformed as well. In
2001, as the shortening days of late summer brought chilly afternoons
and crimson leaves to the San Francisco peninsula, Alexander stepped
down at sixty-seven from the insurance company where he had labored for
decades---as a fairly effective underchief, but where he was no longer
nimble enough for the shifting strata of Silicon Valley. His domain
would now be at home only, among the coastal redwoods of Pacifica, in
the high-raftered house he and his wife had built in a foggy ravine
twenty years earlier---big enough for their three sons and perhaps some
grandchildren. He was a stately man, slightly bent, in the growing calm.
No warning notes had sounded in his life, no explanatory story was found
that his family could share, by the time I met them in the emergency
room six weeks after September 11. By then, his whole world had been
blasted apart--- not by exploding jet fuel, but by ferocious, exuberant,
unstoppable mania, bearing no resemblance to anything that had come
before in their lives. It was first break---that moment when links to
reality snap in response to a windstorm of stress, or to the scythe of
trauma, or to other triggers unknown--- and the human being first comes
untethered. First break, when those with

mania or schizophrenia are cut loose---at great peril---and sent aloft
by their disease. In September, when the storm tide began to rise,
Alexander had been only marking retirement---sailing the Aegean with his
wife, traveling in antiquity. Now less than two months later, back home,
he was transformed, brought to my emergency room by police and family.
What had been swept along by the hospital process and settled, what I
saw first, had no visible flaw. Not knowing him, I saw only a crisply
alert man scanning the newspaper with intensity, fiercely cross-legged
next to his gurney. The elusive, protean mystery of psychiatry came
next---discovering what it was that had changed for this person, and
why. No brain scans exist to guide diagnosis. We can use rating scales
to quantify symptoms, but even those numbers are just words transformed.
So we assemble words; this is what we have. Phrases are pulled together,
and molded into a narrative. The people involved talked, all of us---in
different combinations: the patient, the police in the hall, the family
in the waiting room---all searching for the right frame. For someone
with no mania in his past or family: why him, why now? He had
experienced the day itself, the strike to the heart of his country, no
more intensely than any other person. Even the pain he had felt, in
empathy for the lost, by itself did not merit this extraordinary
consequence. Death comes badly for conscious beings and always has. The
unthinkable is universal, but mania is not common. Nevertheless it came
for Alexander---after a delay. For a week after September 11, Alexander
was just a bit on the stoic side, only revoicing the common thoughts of
shock and pain around him. He read stories of the victims, but then
began to focus on two of them, a father and a daughter, a pairing he had
not lived personally. A scene emerged and grew more detailed, and he
spoke to his family of imagining their final moments--- while inside his
brain, a secret remapping had begun. In ways still mysterious, new
synapses were formed, and older connections were pruned away. Electrical
patterns shifted, as scripts were overwritten. For a week his biology
silently learned its new tongue, and then it reached out, expressive at
last. The first manifestations were physical. He nearly stopped
sleeping, becoming fully alert and charged with life for twenty-two
hours a day. Never the chattiest before, Alexander now could not hold
back a vast volume of words that came out in a pressured
torrent---turbulent and interjaculating---yet still coherent, at first.
The content of his speech changed too---he was saltier,

charismatic, uplifting, and illuminating. Beyond language, his whole
body was affected; now ablaze in new youth, he was suddenly voracious
and hypersexual. No old bull out to pasture, he was an organic being
newly ready to react, to interface---his skin surfaces were
functionalized and available. Life was lacier, compelling, alluring.
Projects and goals came next. They were valorous and numerous, with a
tinge of excitement, a subthrill of risk. He bought a new Dodge Ram
pickup, with a heavy-duty trailer hitch and extended cab. He ran all
night, read books all day, and studied theory of war, writing pages on
the movements of forces and reserves. A theme of self-sacrifice appeared
and grew stronger; he wrote letters volunteering to join the navy, and
was found one evening rappelling down a redwood trunk in the fog,
training for war. He was breaking from his lifelong chrysalis,
transforming into a newly emerged monarch. There had been a certain
charm to the transition, up to a point, but then he veered into thoughts
of good, evil, death, and redemption. He had dwelt until this event in a
sort of unperforated Lutheranism, stormless and modestly
nourishing---with minimal connectivity to any other part of this life.
Now he began to speak with God---first calmly, then frantically, then in
a scream. Between these prayers there were sermons for others, in which
he became irritable---swinging between euphoria and crying. Nearing
midnight before admission, he ran from the house with his quail gun,
throwing branches and bark at his sons as they tried to stop him in the
yard. Police found him two hours later, at bay in a thicket near a dry
streambed, ready to strafe the stinkweed. They took him and subdued him
with the mundanities of medical-legal incantations, all the energy still
brimming up behind his eyes like tears. The fury had dimmed externally
over the next several hours in the hospital. By the time I spoke with
him, he had only a rhythmic motor pattern, like a caged pacing lion,
except it was a vocalization, a refrain again and again: I just don't
understand. With clarity, with surety in his own form and role, he could
not understand his family's reaction---why his every action did not seem
perfectly logical to them, an example which all should follow. The
fixity was striking, and pure. Alexander's first break had been a clean
separation, without the messy compound breaks of psychosis or drugs. He
was dislocated. Unchurched. What next for the new
warrior---dopamine-receptor antagonists perhaps? He did not want help,
saw no need for our process, and refused treatment. In

the closed system of his pressured logic, there was pure clarity, and
explosive danger. An irresolute messenger, I wavered before him as he
described the image that had grown in his mind, of the girl on the
plane, with the father holding her head gently and firmly, locking eyes
so she could see only him until the end. Pictures came to me, intense
associations. The unique abstraction of psychiatry---science with
language, medicine with text, upon which the most effective care is
built---allowed me to spend each day immersed in words and images,
moving beyond story to allegory, even if doing so was futile---in
dialogue with history, with neuroscience, with art, and with my own
experience. Here the first story that came to me, provoked by his
transformation, perhaps prompted by the image of Alexander sailing among
the Greek isles, was Ovid's hunter Actaeon---son of a herdsman---who was
turned into a stag as a punishment from the angry goddess Artemis, after
he was caught spying upon her bathing in a stream. He had new strength,
new speed, a new form---he was given strong horns and fleet hooves---but
the timing was off, the context was all wrong. He had become a prey
animal in the midst of his own hounds---Blackfoot, Trailchaser, Hungry,
Hurricane---who tore him to pieces. Perhaps it was an Actaeon I saw
before me, transformed by the moon goddess, with the police and me as
Arcadian hounds, and Cretanbred, and Spartan---the whole pack, with the
lust of blood upon us, baying over cliffs and crags and ledges where no
trail runs. But then...unlike the case with Actaeon, whose new form of a
stag had no value, for Alexander there was a use, grim and suitable, for
the new form he had been given. In this sacrifice, he was perhaps more
of a Joan of Arc---like Alexander, born far from military life. In her
case it was on a small farm in Lorraine where the mystery began to speak
to her. Without trying to diagnose a historical figure---always tempting
but usually unwise for psychiatrists---I could not help but imagine how
her alteration happened to briefly work well for her. When she was only
seventeen, as France began to fall before English armies, she emerged
into a new way of being---not disorganized as in schizophrenia, but
goal-directed, focused on continental politics and military strategy.
She talked herself to the side of the Dauphin with a firm conviction
that she was essential, and with a powerful religiosity that allowed her
to infuse the fight with a spirit seen as divine---bearing banners not
swords, living through maelstroms of crossbow bolts, advancing through
her own blood to the coronation.

Alexander's transformation also arose in the pastoral quiet of a country
in peril---an alteration created by that very peril---and his new form
fit the crisis. Some details were imperfect---the tenor of current
culture was mismatched for what he had become---and he was the wrong
vessel, but then: was he any lesssuited than a seventeen-year-old
peasant with no training in tactics or politics? By the time she was
captured by the English and burned at the stake, Joan had already saved
her country and won the war. And here we were about to cure Alexander,
to cauterize this illness, to burn away the spirit. A bumpkin
psychiatrist, I stood ready, with my medieval tools. And there, in that
uncertain moment---the two of us caught in a tiny personal crosscurrent,
lost in a vast global atmosphere that had been marred for months by
burning flesh and the slipstreams of airborne predators---a thin and
fragile tendril of memory, of my own story, swirled to the surface.

• I was leaning against a chain-link fence, the perimeter for an outdoor
platform of the T---Boston's subway. It was near midnight on a chilly
October evening. Drained after a long day in the lab and a failed
experiment, I was fatigued and irritated. The area was nearly deserted,
except for two men talking calmly at the other end of the dimly lit
platform. A pair of silhouettes, one tall, one short. For a minute of
peace I closed my eyes and bowed my head as we waited together. When my
eyes opened to look for the train, I saw an eight-inch blade, silver and
gold in the subway glow, fine at the tip, even tender as it nearly
touched my shirt, nearly part of me. I saw only the beautiful blade, in
incredible detail, and everything else was blacked out; I was swept in,
there was nothing else in the world, and in that moment, I felt an
awareness of all the events and interactions and steps with which the
world had positioned me here, and seemed to understand that this fate
had been prepared for me with care and affection. I had come to where I
should be, and an odd peace, a grace, came over me. I surrendered my
backpack, waiting passively as it was emptied by the tall shadow,
keeping my eyes focused firmly on the blade held by the other. My sweet
misericord, the thin blade of mercy used in the aftermath of medieval
battles, dispatching the dying at Orléans and Agincourt. The steel
seemed to

pulse in the surreal light of the subway platform, with every cell of my
body locked into its rhythm. The backpack contents were exposed---which
I knew to be only a developmental biology journal and seventy-five cents
for the subway fare--- and the next memories are fragmented. A burst of
angry words, the knife seemed to twitch with unclear intent, and then I
was suddenly no longer passive. I remember sweeping my left arm up and
out, creating a narrow space to break away to the right. In my next
conscious memory I am blocks away, not knowing where, running alone
through the star-cold night. There followed in me a high energy over the
next few weeks, a bubbling up inside of anger and euphoria, a feeling in
my chest like a geyser preparing to erupt. Then the sensation eased to a
week or two of light pressure; then everything was distilled down to a
calm clarity---and finally...nothing. It was gone, never to return---a
minor deviation, a ride, a day trip, real but weak in me, never breaking
through. As I considered Alexander, it seemed his brain, unlike my own,
must have been prepared---soil truly fallow, fertile and waiting for the
seed. Yet even he might have escaped mania if not for September 11;
mania comes at great cost, and his brain had set a high threshold, tuned
to only respond this way to a seemingly existential threat to the group:
his whole community appearing at risk, with invaders descending. His
stolid odyssey of the useful and the good ended only with burning
towers, and his transition when initiated was swift and sure, a second
puberty, remapping him a final time. Steroid stress hormones coursed
through his brain like juvenile hormone through a caterpillar, sweeping
away the squirming and helpless peacetime stage, the old larval neurons
killing themselves, involuting---ruthless, precise, meticulous. On into
mania---wings for the mind. Metamorphosis. Perhaps I lacked the genes,
the temperament, the mental landscape to fully quicken. Or perhaps it
was that my circumstances had been different from Alexander's; I had
been alone, the assault had been directed only at me, not my
community---and I could run, needing only two minutes of pitch-perfect
adrenaline-related neurochemicals to meet the threat, just that
elegantly tuned fight-or-flight response. A stable behavioral change,
lasting weeks or months, would have made no sense. Mania, at least in
those cases when symptoms and threat align (as they did for Alexander)
would seem more of a durable and social fury, by some design or chance
prolonged for defense of the community with goal-directed activity, but
only if a new way of being were needed, an

elevated state. Mood elevation has the capability to bring forth energy
for social construction---for the time needed to build defensive
earthworks under the rumor of war, to migrate the drought-stricken clan
for weeks toward water without sleeping, to harvest all the winter wheat
when the locusts hatch---and with all the rush of a positive charge,
that rewarding feeling needed to upend preexisting priorities
temporarily, to align a person's whole internal value system to meet the
crisis. But in our world, mania is fraught with danger: harmful to the
patient and costly to the community; it is the exception rather than the
rule for symptoms to even appear appropriate. Thwarted in the modern
milieu by our intricate conventions and rigid rules, the incompletely
hatched monarch is trapped in a cracked and hardened casing---with new
wings caught, beginning to rip in the raging of the struggle to emerge.
As we talked, I could feel the room charged with this trapped energy. In
his irritation and agitation, Alexander unknowingly was spawning
imagined scenes of his life in my mind that took root as the airplane
scene had for him, unspoken but oddly clear and detailed. I let the
vision grow, and saw his own eyes opening in his living room, back home
from his odyssey in October, to a castrated dog on the rug with its
bloated belly irritatingly exposed, breathing stertorously out of step
with the Pachelbel coming over the dusty stereo. The dog was Alexander
of the last thirty years: weak, infertile, asynchronous. The need to
leap up and strike out---to act---would have surged. A hiking trip to a
coastal estuary was proposed by his wife, to spend some quiet time among
the elegance of the local herons, but what mattered to Alexander
actually were the shrikes and butcher-birds of the desert, the Predators
flying over Mazār-e Sharīf. Called to serve, Kandahar's time had come
again---to march from Macedon to the east one more time. He would have
felt a rising swirl of rage. No, it was of libido. His ducts would have
felt filled with fluid, all of them, with the ductal smooth muscle
tensing against what he had stored within for decades. Squeezing on what
he had, what he had to give. Strong as jet fuel.

• There had been no natural way of stopping the birth of this new being,
any more than stopping childbirth, and mania can last for weeks or more
on its own. But in the hospital, any parturition can be slowed or
stopped, for a time.

When Alexander demanded to leave the ER, triggering frantic pleas from
his family, under my care his freedom was taken and civil rights
temporarily stripped away. Thus roped to the mast, he received
olanzapine---dopamine and serotonin modulation, to block mania's siren
song---and within a week he was, as we say, normalizing. But there was
an unapplausive feel to the outcome; normalizing him was not a clear-cut
win. The clinical team exchanged no pleased commentary on rounds.
Instead there were only hesitant and fragmented conversations in the
housestaff room on the meaning of mania, and on the ethics of
intervention. Mania cannot be trivialized or romanticized. As
interesting as the state is--- and as euphoric as the patients can be,
at least briefly uplifting all around them with their contagious belief
in what might be possible---mania is destructive. In the vulnerable,
those predisposed to bipolar disorder, mania is often not
threat-triggered at all, and does not even approach utility; rather, it
is unpredictable and can be accompanied by psychosis, a breakdown in the
process of thinking, the catastrophe of suicidal depression, and death.
Any value of mania today is inconsistent, but increased-energy states
are consistent: a common heritage of humanity across cultures and
continents. Not all of these states fit exactly into the same frame.
Variants might include amok in Malaysia, a state of intense brooding
followed by persecutory ideas and a frenzy of activity, or bouffée
délirante in West Africa and Haiti, a state of sudden agitated behavior,
excitement, and paranoia. Both of these, and mania itself which is seen
around the world, may represent thin slices through a much broader and
complex multidimensional structure, a cluster of possible behaviors, of
altered states. Different cultures take their own cross sections to
describe these states, each at a distinctive angle. Human evolution
clearly has not converged upon a single or ideal strategy for sustained
mood elevation, if there can be one, and many different genes are linked
to bipolar disorder. Telling the stories of past struggles in human
evolution, our genomes are laden with other first-pass fixes that still
need refinement. Across much of modern medicine outside of psychiatry,
it has long been possible to ask, and even answer, why a genetic disease
might be common. To explain the persistence of the blood disease
sickle-cell anemia, for example, we can tell stories of our coexistence
with the microbial parasite Plasmodium malariae, which evolved along
with us, driving adaptation of our blood cells and immune systems in an
agonizing call-and-response playing out over millions of years.

Sickle-cell disease and the related diseases called thalassemias (a
classical name, for their Mediterranean distribution) are burdens borne
by many modern human beings who share peri-equatorial genetic roots,
where Plasmodium and its mosquito carrier thrive. The burden takes the
form of mutations in hemoglobin, the protein in our red blood cells that
delivers oxygen to mitochondria (like Plasmodium once immigrant
microbes, our mitochondria are now fully symbiotic partners in our
survival). Plasmodium lives in our red blood cells if it can get in, and
these mutations in hemoglobin work against this ancient enemy,
suppressing malaria as they block the spread of Plasmodium through the
blood. The mutations also, however, bring the risk of misshapen red
blood cells that cause disease symptoms: pain, infection, and stroke. As
in cystic fibrosis, the human carriers with one mutant gene usually have
no symptoms, and it is only when two mutant genes come together that the
sickle-cell disease state is created. But unlike those who carry a
single cystic fibrosis gene (at least as far as we understand it today),
sickle-cell carriers (the nondiseased, carriers of only one mutation)
have a clear benefit, resisting malaria and thus revealing a harsh
evolutionary bargain: a steep price is paid only by those with two
copies of the mutation for a benefit enjoyed by others with one copy,
who do not suffer. Thus these mutations are ragged measures, quick
hacks, still jousting in the tortuously slow arena of natural selection.
The lesson of the sickle cell is that the disease, and the diseased,
make sense together only in the broader frame of the human family and
its evolution. Though it is not always easy for scientists to find these
perspectives, the simple fact of achieving an explanation has been
important, helping to liberate us from the grip of mysticism and blame.
Psychiatry, however, has continued without such insight. More
consequential than any other type of disease in terms of the immensity
of death, disability, and suffering caused around the world, mental
illnesses nevertheless have remained essentially unexplained in this
way, and no definitive explanation is possible now. Yet neuroscience has
reached a tipping point. For the first time, scientific explanations for
what these illnesses are, biologically, seem within reach---and as with
sickle cell, as with all of human health and disease, the prevalence of
mental illness should be informed by evolutionary considerations; as
Theodosius Dobzhansky wrote in 1973, nothing in biology makes sense
except in the light of evolution.

But thinking about survival and reproduction trade-offs can be
misleading if the questions asked are naïve or incomplete. For example,
the harm of psychiatric disease to patients seems clear, but who would
be the recipient of the evolutionary benefit, if any, that allows these
traits to persist? With the sickle-cell trait, those who receive the
benefit are not the same as those who suffer. Is this also the case for
mental illness, that there is some benefit only for close relatives? Or
alternatively, could it be that the mentally ill do directly
benefit---at some time, in some way? We must acknowledge that the
present-day world could provide no answer ---evolution is slow, while
cultural changes are fast, and society is not close to a steady state.
We are likely to be imperfectly suited for our world as a result. But
there is hope for understanding; those traits and states we do have
likely mattered for survival until very recently, if not right up to the
present. What doesn't matter for survival quickly disappears, leaving
only traces, footprints in the damp sand of genomes, fading with the
waves of generations. In the lineage of mammals, egg yolk genes were
lost as soon as milk evolved (though broken fragments of the yolk genes
persist, even within our own genomes still). Cave fish and cave
salamanders---in sunless colonies, blocked off from the surface
world---lose their eyes after generations of darkness, leaving skin
stretched over sockets in the skull, relics of a sense no longer needed.
To understand this oddity of its design, a cave salamander would need to
know about something beyond its conceptual reach---the illuminated world
of its ancestors, and so the value of the twin holes in its skull:
pathways for information in an ancient world of light, but only
vulnerabilities in the modern world. Likewise inexplicable depths of our
own feelings, and our own weaknesses, might also be best understood in
the context of the long march to our current forms, finding little in
the present world explanatory. But caution is needed: not only do we
lack data, but also our imagination itself is subjective, and our
perspective is limited and biased. The borders separating broken and
unbroken may shift, and blur, and even fade away as we approach.
Currently it is impossible to be definitive about the role of evolution
in mental illness. But human origins and evolution have to be part of
the picture in thinking about psychiatry---as with anything in biology
reflecting conflicts and compromises that arose, and were tested, over
many generations. A pure hunter-gatherer, more than one hundred thousand
years ago, might not have needed the prolonged intensity of mania, and
would have benefited from

simply cutting losses and moving on from threat or conflict---to new
vistas beyond the horizon. But when we build---as we have more recently,
in the form of houses, farms, communities, multigenerational families,
culture--- existential threat might be best met with an elevated state
of being, even if unsustainable. Neuroscience has made little progress
in understanding mania, or the bipolar disorder syndromes, which form a
spectrum of severity all sharing a manic-like state. Indeed, mania is
not binary but ranges in degree from mild hypomania (a sustainable
mood-elevated state not needing hospitalization) to recurrent
spontaneous manias (increasingly severe with each episode--- psychotic
even, with breaks in perception of reality---ending in a dementialike
state if untreated). Neuroscientists interested in mania have explored
certain types of brain cells with relevance to the core symptoms. For
example, dopamine neurons have attracted attention for their known roles
in guiding motivation and reward seeking---elements clearly overabundant
in mania, on display in that remarkable symptom we call "increased
goal-directed behavior," and exemplified in the numerous projects,
investments, plans, and energy of Alexander's rebirth. Circadian rhythm
circuits have also been pursued, since one of the most striking features
of mania---used in diagnosis as well, and prominent in Alexander---is a
profoundly decreased need for sleep. This symptom is especially
interesting since mania does not cause poor sleep per se (nor attendant
problems that come with the poor sleep of insomnia such as lethargy,
somnolence, and the like). In mania there is a true decreased need for
sleep---as Alexander experienced---with maintained high functioning of
brain and body over prolonged periods, and very little rest taken or
required. Are these dopamine and circadian circuits clues, then,
embodying pathways into the mystery that is mania? In 2015 the dopamine
and circadian aspects were brought together with optogenetics. Mice with
a mutation in the circadian rhythm mechanism, in a gene called Clock,
were found to show behavior that could be interpreted as manic-like, in
the form of prolonged phases of extremely high movement levels. This
state was found to occur at the same time as phases of higher dopamine
neuron activity. Could that dopamine elevation be causal, driving
frenzied movement levels in mice? Using optogenetics, the team found
that increasing the activity of dopamine neurons could indeed induce the
manic-like behavior; furthermore, suppressing dopamine neuron activity
could reverse the manic-like state of the

Clock mutant mice. We are far from a deep understanding of mania, but
optogenetics has helped unify two of the leading hypothesized circuit
mechanisms. Going forward, it may be useful to consider that the
dopamine neuron population is not monolithic but composed of many
distinct types that can be separably identified early in mammalian brain
development; future work may allow targeting specific subtypes relevant
to mania, such as those specific dopamine neurons that project to brain
regions involved in generating actions and action plans. What other
genes relevant to mania are found in human beings? Bipolar disorders are
heritable, running strongly in families, but there are few single genes
that, by themselves, can determine the disorder---in fact, there may be
dozens of genes or more that each contribute small effects, as with
height. A few of these genes have turned up fairly consistently with
scanning of whole human genomes in studies of type I bipolar---the kind
with spontaneous and severe manias, among the most strongly heritable of
psychiatric diseases. ANK3 is one such gene, which directs the
production of a protein called ankyrin 3 (also known as ankyrin G),
which organizes the electrical infrastructure of the initial segment of
the axon---the first section of each threadlike output wire, that
electrical-information transmission line connecting each brain cell with
all of its receivers across the brain. These mutations, which contribute
to causing bipolar disorder in some people, likely lead to insufficient
ankyrin 3 production. In 2017 a mouse line was created with "knocked
out"---insufficient---ankyrin 3. These initial segments of the axon were
indeed poorly organized in the knockout mice as a result, in an
interesting way. Inhibitory synapses that would normally be clustered at
that crucial spot of the axon, acting like dampers to prevent
overexcitation, were gone. And the mice showed some manic-like
properties: much higher physical activity levels, in terms of both
general locomotion and movements specifically directed toward overcoming
stressful challenges--- that is, elevated goal-directed behavior.
Amazingly, this pattern could be blocked in the mice by medications,
including lithium, that are highly effective for bipolar in human
beings. As interesting as ANK3 is to psychiatrists and neuroscientists,
in human beings its mutations cannot alone explain all mania, and
bipolar disorder in general is far from understood. We also do not
understand the association of mania with depression---that other "pole"
of bipolar. Manias frequently end in deep depression, and many patients
cycle from up states to down states: mania

to depression, or depression to hypomania and back---but nobody knows
why, and the ANK3 studies do not offer an answer. Is there a neural
resource of some kind that is consumed by mania, leading to a slide into
depression? Or perhaps instead there is overcorrection from a system
responsible for turning off mania when the threat is past, but
occasionally overshooting? An imprecise hack indeed---one that in the
past could be tolerated by our species as a whole, if not so much by
those living with it.

• The evolution of civilization is far faster than the evolution of
biology. The global reach and power of individuals, across space and
time, now make hypomania and mania more dangerous, and more destructive.
Certain historically significant figures have, like Alexander, no doubt
borne this burden or one like it, all trying to meet the challenges of
their time---and for a brief moment have found themselves moving toward
a state of vigor, optimism, and charisma that from some perspective is
an elevated expression of what a human being can be. But disaster would
have come for many of them---and for Alexander, born in the wrong time
and place, there was no safe opportunity to complete the metamorphosis,
to fulfill that calling. Upon discharge from the altered world of the
hospital, as when leaving Baum's land of Oz, every patient seems to
receive a parting gift in some form. On surgical services, some patients
even receive a new heart. As we say in the hospital, in psychiatry, most
patients are Dorothies---they just get to go home. This was the only
path for Alexander: coerced treatment, renormalization, and release back
to his community---the aligned goal of everyone who cared for him. At
follow-up one year later, Alexander's wife described him as "better than
ever." The shadow of his illness had been that darkness shining in
brightness of Joyce's Ulysses; this was a darkness that the brightness
could not comprehend. Though no longer manic, he still could not bring
himself to repudiate the state he had entered into, nor his actions in
the state. He still didn't understand why we had acted as we did. I
thought him a little glum about it all, but in the end, he had been
given a way to live with his wife again, to slip into retirement without
redirection or consequence, and to hike in the heronry.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 3

CARRYING CAPACITY Tonally the individual voice is a dialect; it shapes
its own accent, its own vocabulary and melody in defiance of an imperial
concept of language, the language of Ozymandias, libraries and
dictionaries, law courts and critics, and churches, universities,
political dogma, the diction of institutions. ---Derek Walcott, The
Antilles: Fragments of Epic Memory; The Nobel Lecture (1992)

"I

had a teratoma in Paris," Aynur said. "It started from an egg in my
ovary, and sprouted teeth and living neurons and clumps of hair, all
twisted together, growing in my belly. The French doctors took the tumor
out, but after the surgery it was hard for me to walk, or bend, or sit
upright. I was living alone, and I had to do everything very slowly. "I
was in this state, when I got a strange letter---with twelve pictures of
our hometown, unexplained---in the mail, from my mother. I remember
stepping carefully across my loft to spread out the photos on my
breakfast table. "I felt something of the warmth of home. It was like my
mother was touching me physically, reaching her hand out across the
whole breadth of Europe and Asia. The photos showed familiar street
views, buildings crowded against the roads, with our rounded windows and
wrought-iron balconies, and with people standing out vividly against the
gray skies of fall, like droplets of dye. "The colors on our
clothes---you could never see such a scene in Palo Alto. Deep reds, rich
indigos, really brilliant yellows---and all pigments from nature---dark
brown from walnut skin, that feathery purple from the tamarisk tree. You
might have seen these dyes on our silks, the Uighur kind we call
atlas---which means graceful silk. It's soft but strong, used for
women's costumes and ribbons and wall hangings. The world might know of
our silks, I think, if nothing else about us. And there are similar
color styles on our everyday work clothes, even on manufactured
jackets---bright

purple and peach and orange and gold, mass-produced garments that we get
trucked from the capital in Ürümqi---it's all the same spirit, just our
taste, the contrast of strong colors. "But there was a problem. The
longer I looked at the photos, and the note, the more I felt there was
something strange going on. There was no explanation in my mother's
short letter, no comment on the pictures themselves---and her actual
written words were just a dry response to my own last note. "I had
emailed her a long update on my graduate work---and since there had been
no news from my husband for two weeks, I had asked her if I should come
home for a visit. I looked back at my mother's note, and reread her
words: 'You should not come. It is still too hot here, and now you are
not used to it. You have been so long in France, you should stay there.'
But actually it was France having heat waves, and I had complained to
her already about it. Paris over the summer that year had been hotter
than ever, and anyway I could see from the pictures the little boys and
girls at home were already in their autumn coats. "After a few minutes,
I noticed something else: there were no young men on the streets. Many
children, women, and motor scooters. But all the men, of my husband's
age, were gone from the streets. In every photo. "I remember then in my
haste to get out, to find an open Internet café, I almost fell down the
narrow stairs leading to the rainy street. A piercing pain from my
surgery was just starting to surface as I reached the door to my
apartment, but only when I got down to the street did I understand how
bad it was. I couldn't go back up. I couldn't even walk. "There on the
street in Paris, it came to me how deeply I was hurt inside. It was
dark, and the stones were wet. My family was in danger, and I was alone.
And there I found, when I couldn't walk, that I could run."

• Aynur was animated and exuberant, and broadly smiling at times, in a
manner discordant with the darkness of her story and its gathering
crescendo of physical and emotional pain. I began wordlessly wondering
what natural process in the brain sets the timing for awareness of
suffering. At the same time, in a parallel stream of thought, I was
secretly awed by her

imagery. It was unexpected and effortless, and her story was coming in a
torrent that grew rapidly more powerful. Awareness of anything,
including our internal feelings---consciousness, some would say---does
not simply flip on and off, as if controlled by a switch. Awareness even
of pain gathers itself, seeming to emerge with movement in time, along a
trajectory arcing from one moment to another. Each feeling is intimately
entwined with---and perhaps even identical with---a growing and cresting
and abating of brain activity. That timescale in one sense spans
hundreds of milliseconds, and in another sense, millions of years.
Feelings are, like people, paths through time. The elements of human
subjectivity---what we all feel with our conscious minds, and when---may
exist in the modern world only to the extent that these feelings caused
actions needed for survival before, in the distant past. And so for
Aynur and me, with homes at nearly opposite ends of the earth---our
feelings in common mattered, and it also probably mattered how they were
felt many millennia ago. Recognizing this connection seemed to me a
grace of sorts, granted to our long-gone forebears across the cold
expanse of time---and also seemed a comfort in the present:
acknowledging all the partners in this family conversation, and seeing
feelings not as clinical injections of information into our minds from
the external world, but rather as connections with each other, across
the scattered expanse and long unwritten history of the human family. At
the other end of timescales in biology, just as Aynur experienced the
emergence of her visceral pain, our indwelling experiences as individual
animals are also defined by movement in time---over a fraction of a
second. Each conscious experience is dynamic on this timescale. It
manifests, peaks, and lingers---keeping its own pace, separate from the
stimulus that brings it forth. This is a long time for consciousness to
take in coalescing---a hundredfold slower than the electrical signaling
speed of brain cells in isolation---a matter of two hundred, rather than
two, milliseconds. Whenever the world sends us new bits---a pinprick, an
unexpected sound, a light touch---almost a quarter of a second passes
before that exquisite glow of conscious awareness shines forth. Reflexes
are different---unconscious processes can be much faster---but
consciousness, for some reason, takes its time.

The individual subjective experience, then---in the moment of our
awareness---can be understood from the perspectives of both evolution
and neurobiology to not just represent a dump of data from the external
world. The tidewaters of the external sensory ocean not only percolate
deep but "gather to a greatness," as Gerard Manley Hopkins wrote of the
grandeur of the divine---with a mysterious inwreathing through the
brain's inland fens and waterways, to manifest finally and fully.
Something special is happening. Neuroscientists have come to know this
strange fact of mammalian consciousness from many kinds of experiments,
most grounded in direct measurement of electrical activity in the brain.
Two or three hundred milliseconds elapse before the response to a ping,
an unexpected sound or light, peaks in our cortex---that thin and
wrinkled covering of cells wrapped around the brain of every mammal like
a shawl. Not only does this seem like eons of silence to a cellular
physiologist like myself (used to thinking in shorter timescales of only
two or three milliseconds, across synapses and along axons) but the long
delay is surprising to nonscientists as well, to anyone who has observed
a cat chase its prey, or a boxer lean back from a jab, or just two
people interact in animated conversation---all of which play out on much
faster timescales. The trained boxer seems to dodge before it is
possible, responding to a specific threat trajectory in less time than
it should take if consciousness were required. And human social
interaction, especially, seems impossible in light of this number. How
clumsily slow it would be, how unlike us, to wait almost a quarter of a
second to respond to each new bit of spoken information---or even longer
if actual consideration is involved. And that is only for speech; even
more puzzling is the fullness of social interaction, with all its data
streams. What of integrating the bit-rich visual inputs conveying eye
contact, hand motion, posture? What of each diffident subangulation of a
lip, or shift in body orientation---with recognition of every visual
stimulus essential for generating an appropriate response? These streams
of information need one another to make sense, just as people need one
another for meaning. And what of larger interactions: a team or a town
hall? Human groups are teeming with conflicting desires, polite or
malevolent lies, shifting alignments---each information stream not only
playing out simultaneously but involving the others to generate

meaning, and requiring constant reinterpretation, and co-interpretation,
while the speakers---and their models of the world and one another---all
change with time as well. Deeper insights have license to take longer,
and can come much later--- after all the information is in, after weeks
or months of incubating like a caterpillar in its white-matter cocoon,
ensconced in the silk of interwoven axons---until new awareness emerges
one day, breaking free fully formed.

• "For three more months," Aynur told me, "from that moment, I had no
contact with my husband. I was so afraid. My parents were afraid too,
but very careful. Even when I finally got them on video chat, they said
nothing. I did not get to hear if he was alive. If they had heard
something, they did not say. I couldn't ask directly about the
photos---I didn't know if sending them had been forbidden, or who might
be listening. But a wife should be expected to ask about her husband, I
think. It would be more strange to not ask. Anyway, it didn't matter
what I asked my parents about him---'We don't know,' they said to
everything, and that was all. "Everything was unknown. After two months
of this I lost the ability to sleep. It wasn't just not knowing. It was
that there was nothing to do about it. I couldn't help my loved ones. I
was paralyzed. I was being eaten alive from within---there is nothing
like it that you could understand. All was the opposite of your life
now, where you control everything. "Something had crawled into me, and
begun to gnaw my spine, and hollow me out from within. There was no
knowledge, no power, nothing inside me left. Nothing to do, and nobody
to tell. And that was when I first began to think about suicide. "I got
there slowly, though. I think it was in steps. First, I realized how
much better it would be to face a real fear, a concrete tormentor.
Dealing with a known enemy, even a death with fixed timing, would seem
like paradise by contrast. I came to dream of that death, in waking
sleep, through the days and nights of fall, and into the depths of
winter. And then I thought of taking violent control of that death, and
being the one that could set the exact date and time in a final step
that nobody could prevent, and so

I would be taking back control over myself. And this, once I had
conceived of it, was so desired. "I don't know if I was depressed. I
think that is just a word you use when you hear suicide. I know you like
to use it in psychiatry, here in the West, in your West. And it's fine,
you can call it depression if you like---of course I was not happy. But
let me tell you another way to look at it. "In the cotton fields of my
home, our west, in what you call Xinjiang, the farmers have some
problems with aphids, and in school the students who were interested in
biology---like me---learned about the wasps that the government were
bringing in to suppress the aphids. A lot of the Uighur kids interested
in biology were guided into that field---the party was seeking modern
kinds of employment for our people---not because they cared, really, but
to prevent radicalization. "Wasp warfare like this makes some
sense---each wasp type is specific, restricted to its target species, so
there is little risk of causing new problems. The female wasp injects
her egg right into the aphid she catches; the egg goes through what
would be her stinger, it's called an ovipositor--- sometimes a paralytic
is injected too---and then the egg hatches into a wasp larva that lives
in the aphid, and grows, and partially eats away its insides, all the
while careful to not damage the aphid's vital organs. "Then the wasp
larva breaks out of the belly of the aphid but still makes sure to keep
it alive, and stays close underneath, and spins its cocoon with the
aphid helplessly forming a living shield---the aphid is paralyzed but
capable of a few simple movements if anything comes near, to protect its
invader, to defend its killer---until the new adult wasp emerges from
the cocoon, and the aphid only then is allowed to die, at last. "So let
me ask you: if that aphid could become aware, could come to understand
its situation and choose death first, would it? Of course it would. And
if the aphid could slowly emerge into consciousness, feeling the full
agony of its situation as a human might, as it considered death, would
you call the aphid depressed? I guess you might, but there would be no
point--- since no medication, nor any conceivable treatment, could be
worthwhile, even if it could change the feeling inside. "It doesn't
matter; it's just words. I wanted death, and planned my death. That's
what matters."

• It was at this point that I began to realize the responsibility, and
privilege, I had been given---to encounter this human being and her
story. I did not merit this, to be the one hearing her, but fate had
created an astounding crossing of major threads---historical, medical,
emotional---at this moment in space and time, and so I could not cut her
short when the appointment time had elapsed. I let her story unfold
fully, her images taking form inside me, her experience linking to what
I knew in science and medicine. From the moment we first met, Aynur was
completely at ease, and seemed impelled to share rich personal stories,
adopting an interpersonal style more suitable for old classmates meeting
at a school reunion. By itself this could be a red flag, regarding both
the patient and the therapist---and their interaction---but I ended up
finding no hint in her, or in myself, of what a psychiatrist could look
for in such cases. For example, I never identified interpersonal
patterns she had lived through that I might be evoking in her---a
formative teacher, or an older brother, or a local doctor--- nor did I
perceive any pattern she might be bringing forth in me from my own life.
This is always a risk, the patient and psychiatrist fitting into roles
and calling up feelings from past experiences---often a problem, and
sometimes a solution, in therapeutic relationships. There were also no
hints of personality or mood disorders in Aynur. Borderline and
histrionic personality traits would be near the top of the list, in
principle---along with hypomania, that stably elevated state on the
mooddisorder spectrum---but there was nothing to corroborate these.
Aynur simply told her intensely personal narratives with a natural frame
of friendship, in as pure and engaged a social state as I had ever seen
or imagined, with speech rich and anecdotes textured, somehow all in a
language she did not know well, in a country she had known for less than
a year. Aynur seemed to me an archetype of the social state that our
lineage might have evolved to allow, and as I listened I thought about
the costs incurred---the metabolic bill paid each day, the brain
resources allocated in each individual, for such a state to be
possible---and also where this all began for the social mammals in our
ancestry, perhaps in troops of early primates. The costs would have been
substantial, I thought, since there is

nothing as uncertain, and therefore as challenging to compute, as the
social interaction in biology---not even the hunt of an unpredictable
prey. The cat cannot predict which way the rat will turn, but there are
not nearly so many possibilities as in a human interaction. And no
hidden agendas---the rat wants to live, but what on earth does another
person in a conversation want? And of course the rat can usually only
express its drive to live in two dimensions, running on the plane of the
ground. Likewise for the boxer, there is just a left and a right hand to
worry about, and certain sequences and trajectories for each. But the
social brain needs a new mode of function, still requiring swiftness yet
also operating along an enormous number of dimensions, running in a
regime where a little bit of new information---any deviation from the
current model, perhaps caught by and encoded in a few cells only
---should be able to tip the observer into an improved model of the
other individual, and the interaction into a better-predictive timeline.
Yet the observer's brain also should not be overexcitable, and should in
fact resist noise in the system that might cause switching to an
incorrect model. It would still be important to suppress spontaneous
ignition of a false perception, a harmful perspective that might arise
from random sparks of neural fire. As with anything in biology, the
importance of such a process can be assessed by the consequences of its
absence. We know the barrier, the lack of connection---distance and
mistrust---when eye contact is even just a moment too brief. Yet a
chilling effect also arises from eye contact held a fraction of a second
too long, if not paired with a social signal of warmth. Temporal
precision is clearly essential, as much for social interaction as for
anything else in biology---severely pressuring the circuitry responsible
for imposing the odd and ponderously slow pace of consciousness, that
twohundred-millisecond delay. One possible solution, to speed this
give-and-take, would be a premodeling, an unconscious gaming-out of
events ahead of time in the brain. This feat could be achieved if the
social being had many models of the world---and of the social
partner---running at once, under the surface, that predicted the other's
actions and feelings well into the future. A key role---perhaps the
major role---of the mammalian cortex might be to solve this prediction
problem, to run models of the present and future,

bringing together as much contextual information as possible from the
world to inform these models. At the same time, the cortical system
would have to detect with great sensitivity even small
surprises---deviations from the current model that would indicate the
need to hop to another. Running these countless models in parallel would
make it unnecessary to calculate and spool up a whole new timeline in
the conscious mind with each new bit of information, since each model
would provide and prescribe actions, replies, forks into the
future---moves and countermoves---over many timesteps, in a conditional
hyperchess of the social mind. The computational energy required in the
brain, in order to constantly run these unconscious predictive models,
would be vast. Perhaps this expendable element is the neural
circuit-level resource exhausted quickly in the introvert, or in
people---most people---who tire from prolonged social interaction. On
the other hand, people with especially deep resources for this brain
state would be the true extroverts, thriving on constant human
contact---like Aynur, as became clear even in the early going of the
time we had scheduled, in what was supposed to be a quick and
unremarkable evaluation, a check-in of sorts occasioned by her brief
suicidality while she had been living in Europe. It was an interview
unique in my experience--- not just for the searing circumstances of her
life, but for her intensely social disposition---and at the heart of it
all was a human being who had wanted to die.

• "There are two ways we seem to choose to do this," Aynur said. "In my
hometown the buildings were not tall enough to make death from a jump
certain, but in Kashgar they can do that, and certainly in Paris. The
other way, well, atlas silk is so strong. I had many sashes, and one
easily sets up bricks or books that can be kicked away under a rafter,
or perhaps beneath a trellis in an outside garden. "Why didn't I do it?
My mother, I think. Even if I were forced to lose all my dreams as a
scientist, and I could only have one piece of bread a day for the rest
of my life, I would accept that, if I could be with my mom. "The
Parisians say they are more social than the Americans, and they are in
some ways---they spend much more time with their family and friends.

But nothing like the Uighur. You will laugh, but after my marriage I
still slept between my two parents, in their bed, for months, as I had
my whole life until then. This would be impossible in your
West---unwifely, or worse. But that is how close we are. I could not end
my life, because of family, because I could not harm those people close
to me. I could not murder those relationships with my own hand. "So I
went on, alone in Paris, gnawed away from the inside, and then when I
was somehow still alive after three months, in the abyss of winter, they
released my husband, and he was able to contact me. Like all the young
men there, my husband had been sent to a concentration camp. There might
be another word for it in English, I don't know, since they were not
killed, not really. "When they released him he called me, we did a video
chat. He was much thinner, with a shaved head, and his voice was very
weak. I didn't know if he had been tortured, but he was so much more
quiet, even more hollowed than I, and would not speak of what had
happened. He told me he was being moved out of Xinjiang, to work in the
cities closer to the coast. That was all he could say, he would be
transported east, and he was not sure if or when we would meet again. So
that's it now, he lives as a shell, making coarse movements. "That's
where things are still, mostly. This was last year, before I transferred
my studies here from Paris, when the government was still denying these
camps existed. This year, they are admitting existence, but they are
calling them educational centers. People are sent there for failing to
learn and speak the oath of allegiance in Mandarin. Or for being
two-faced, as they call it---saying all the words correctly, but somehow
not showing the right passion in their actions, or a deep commitment to
the state. "Oh, and they bulldozed the mosques in the town, while the
young men were in the camps."

• As Aynur was my last appointment of the morning I did not have to stop
her to see another patient, only needing to sacrifice my lunch hour---an
easy decision. My assessment had been long clear, and completed: she had
problems in the past only---anxiety symptoms and an adjustment disorder

due to extraordinarily stressful life events---with no current
psychiatric diagnosis. In a patient with cognitive difficulty in domains
beyond the social (Aynur had none, and was working toward a postgraduate
degree in evolutionary biology), and who had shown certain facial
features, I would have considered Williams syndrome, a
chromosomal-deletion disorder. Despite anxiety and cognitive impairment,
Williams patients can seem extremely socially adept---exhibiting
expansive, rich storytelling and immediate personal bonding (though of
uncertain depth) even with strangers. Williams syndrome is still
mysterious to this day, and still fascinating. But my clinical
specialization was more focused toward care at the other extreme of
social skill---treating human beings with brain states less inclined to,
and less adept for, social interaction---on the autism spectrum. This
was one of my two clinical passions (along with treating depression).
From the earliest days of my practice, when I first emerged from
residency training as an attending psychiatrist, the clinic intake staff
were instructed to guide patients needing evaluation for a possible
autism diagnosis to my care. I also asked the intake team to send me
known autism patients who were challenging---people already diagnosed on
that spectrum, but complicated for one reason or another, and referred
by outside doctors (the same process that brought depression cases to my
clinic). In this way, following the mystery of the underlying diseases,
I found myself becoming a doctor who specialized in two disorders nearly
untreatable with medicine: autism and treatment-resistant depression.
Knowing that no medical treatment existed for autism itself, I sought to
help, in some way, a large and growing underserved population: adult
autism patients no longer under the care of their pediatric physicians.
These patients almost always suffer from treatable conditions occurring
along with autism---comorbid conditions, as we call them, such as
anxiety. My consideration in starting this clinic was that these
disorders were often deeply affected by, and certainly framed by, the
autism itself, and so could be best treated by a doctor with some
specialization in altered social function. Severe autism is defined by
partial or complete inability to use language. But autism on the "high"
end of the spectrum---socially, still the inverse of Aynur's state
though with good language skills---also comes with its own

challenges. Because these autism-spectrum individuals still have
impaired social understanding, they can face a difficult conundrum in
living their lives. With language ability and intelligence generally
intact, and capability for employment typical (or even exceptional in
the modern world), interaction with the broader community proceeds---but
this interaction can be confusing and intensely anxiety-provoking,
leading in some cases to serious new symptoms. The social realm, and
society in general---dominated as it is by the vagaries of human
behavior---can be a mystery, even a minefield, for these conversant
autism patients. How did that person know what to say just then? How on
earth is consensus reached in a group? Where am I supposed to look as
this person speaks? For these patients hell can indeed be---as Sartre
noted---other people. People are complex systems, but complex systems
per se are not the problem for these patients, nor even complex systems
that change with time ---as long as the dynamics are predictable. Lines
of code, a train moving along a one- or two-dimensional track on a
timetable, the interlocking street architecture of a city---though
complex, these can be appealing by virtue of predictability, especially
to people living with autism. On the other hand,
unpredictability---exemplified by social interaction---can be highly
aversive, especially to those on this spectrum. Understanding the
precise sense in which social interaction can feel bad, I thought, will
matter for the underlying neuroscience, and for helping human beings who
live with autism (the entire spectrum all dwelling at the opposite pole
of social aptitude from Williams cases, and from Aynur). Was social
avoidance in autism not resulting from exhaustion of some computational
or energetic resource, but rather arising from a fear of uncertainty or
other people? Or perhaps there was something more subtle and hard to put
into words at work here. For me, this latter possibility underscored the
magnitude of the challenge of autism: how will patients already limited
in linguistic expression tell us what is going on inside, if even we
can't put it into words---and worse, if the words don't quite exist
anyway? I had long taken the opportunity to speak with my
high-functioning autism patients who had good language skills. After
building a therapeutic alliance over months of outpatient work and
treating their comorbidities (as

much as was possible), in follow-up clinic visits I would ask questions
about the nature of their inner experience. But where to begin? I
couldn't simply ask the patients to explain their autism. Instead I
started simply and concretely---asking the patients about their
experience of a single physical symptom. Of all the behavioral traits of
the autism spectrum disorders, the avoidance of eye contact was to me
the most arresting, and perhaps could be most illuminating: sometimes a
brief flicker of contact, then the eyes flutter and flee like flushed
quails---to the floor, to the side. A patient named Charles gave me the
clearest answer on this symptom. A young information technology
specialist, he had what we used to call Asperger's syndrome---on the
autism spectrum, but with excellent language skills---and extremely
prominent avoidance of eye contact. In my clinic, I had spent two years
treating his anxiety (successfully, in that he no longer suffered from
panic attacks and workplace anxiety). But at the same time, there had
not been one glimmer of change in autism symptoms, including his eye
contact pattern. I asked him one morning, "What does it feel like when
you do briefly make eye contact? Does it make you feel anxious or
fearful?" "No," he said. "I'm not afraid." "Is it overwhelming?" I
asked. "Yes," Charles said, with no hesitation. "Tell me about that,
Charles, if you can." "Well, when I'm looking at you and talking, if
your face changes then I have to think about what that means, and how I
should react to that, and change what I'm saying." "And what then?" I
gently pressed. "What exactly makes you look away?" "Well," Charles
said, "and then that overloads. It overloads the rest of me." "So it's
like too much information, and that feels bad?" "Yes," he said right
away, "and if I'm looking away, it's easier." For me, as a
neuroscientist and psychiatrist, this was a transcendent moment. Though
sitting before me was a patient with severe eye contact avoidance who
was clearly susceptible to anxiety, I had been allowed to hear something
that few scientists were privileged to know unequivocally: that the eye
contact issue was not due to anxiety. This conclusion was

strongly supported by the completely separate fates of the two symptoms
(anxiety and eye contact) under my treatment---one was cured and the
other was utterly unaffected. For this patient, at least, this
separation between anxiety and eye contact was also directly confirmed
by his own description, in words of a human being positioned on the
autism spectrum so precisely as to be strongly symptomatic, and yet also
fortuitously verbally expressive enough to share his internal
experience. In some ways this single moment justified for me the entire
career progression I had taken, all the extra years of both MD and PhD
training, all the pain and personal challenges of internship, all the
call nights as a single father, worrying about my lonely son. This alone
was enough. Instead of anxiety or fear, a much more interesting, and
subtle, process seemed to be at work. Charles's brain was detecting its
own inability to keep up with the social data stream---while aware that
it should be keeping up, that this was a situation where processing the
data was essential. And more: his brain had created a link from that
informational challenge to a negative-valence subjective internal state,
a state of feeling bad. Mysteries remained, as always. For example, was
that negative feeling innate or learned? His link from high information
rates to feeling bad could have been taught by life, conditioned over
time by repeated and emotionally difficult failures of social
interaction. Or was the aversion present from the beginning of his life,
without training? Was feeling bad an evolutionary mechanism to help
people dodge the torrent of data, guiding them to disengage from full
participation in situations where correct responses to the data would be
expected by others, and failure thus socially consequential---harmful,
even? Was the unpleasant feeling then just triggered by the
unpredictability of the data streaming in---essentially a response to
the high bit rate of information itself? This was an idea that might
matter, a possible insight that had been gifted from just the right
patient---born on the pole opposite to Aynur, but still verbal enough to
tell us his story.

• "It is so unfair," Aynur continued. "We are a nice people. We are not
only close to our families. Guests in our home, we put at the head of
the dinner

table. Any visitor, no matter who, receives this position of honor. That
could never happen here in California---and not in France either. It's
funny for me to see how you are. It is like you are afraid the guest
will take the home away from you. "Are you really worried about that? It
is your house. Nobody is going to take it from you. If we have a guest,
we give them the best seat for one evening. And it makes a strong bond.
So much strength lies in the gesture, costing nothing and creating a
deep connection that will last forever. "I wonder if this part of our
culture is interpreted as weak. But it's not just the Uighur, all the
communities do this, the string of settlements all across the middle of
the continent---we call it the Silk Road, and you call it that too, I
think---but I think this is how we survived, because we could be a
social culture. And we are strong in many other ways---not just in
social bonds. When I was thirteen, I fought seven Han girls by myself.
"We were in our dormitory and they were talking; I knew they didn't
think I could understand them. I was always so much better at
understanding languages than people imagined---I learned Mandarin, and
French, and English, in only weeks each it seemed, all just by hearing
and watching. And these girls were complaining that someone had left a
food dish out in the common area, and they were blaming me. And then one
who was standing in the bathroom in front of the mirror, brushing her
hair, said a terrible thing about my family, my loved ones she had never
met, how my mother smelled. I leapt down from the bunk and dragged the
girl by her hair out of the bathroom. The others all jumped on me but
were surprised, even I was surprised, that I was stronger than all of
them together. I had no idea until that moment that my legs were so
powerful. They fell against me like raindrops, a storm that passed
quickly---and I never heard a rude word again that year. "I feel guilty
today about those girls. I was the one who became violent first. It
seemed I had to defend my family, but now I am twice that age, and I see
they were just kids. And maybe I made things worse, maybe I harmed their
perception of my culture. The Han are good people too, and I don't blame
them for their government. But I wonder now if there even is a path
forward for them, for their country, to move in a new direction, to no
longer be part of such a system. Can they evolve away, or have they
fallen into something from which there is no escape?

"I studied more biology of the aphids after I started my master's
degree, and I learned the history of the wasps, incredibly successful
animals which come in more species than do any other order of animals on
earth. Where does this success come from? Did you know that ants, bees,
wasps, and hornets all started from the same wasp ancestor, in the time
of the dinosaurs, when one little plant-eating fly, like a sawfly, was
born with a strange mutation that made its egg more layable into
animals, right through its ovipositor, that stinger-like egg-laying
tube? And from that one moment an incredible radiation of animals from
one ancestor occurred, because it was so powerful to be able to lay eggs
in any living thing---into a spider, an aphid, another wasp. "That
incredibly thin, hairlike wasp waist---the tiny connector linking one
part of the body to another---was created by chance mutation. Then
natural selection took over, accelerating the expansion of wasp
species---the spread of waspiness---using the waist to allow body
contortions to position and guide increasingly long ovipositors, to get
to beetle larvae deep in trees, to body cavities deep within large
caterpillars. "But the most surprising final part of the story, that
matters here, is that several branches of the wasp family---ants and
hornets and bees, all the social groups---later reverted away from this
life cycle, completely abandoning the parasitoid egg laying into other
organisms that had made them who they were. Complex body parts are
easily lost in evolution if not needed, and are never regained; it is
rare for organisms, once parasitic, once evolved to extremely reduced
body plans, to escape that evolutionary pit. But these did escape in a
different way, through being social, by dependence on each other. They
had found a way of living together---and commitment to this social mode
had set them free. "They still retain that severely reduced wasp
waist---you can see it in ants, and so clearly in the yellow jackets you
have around here---though they don't need it to be so thin anymore. The
wasp waist is a mark of their ancestry, but their ovipositors have
converted to stingers to defend their family, and they use powerful
social structures and bonds to take care of their larvae, and no longer
need to place their young within another living being. "Do you know, it
took fifty million years for wasps to figure out how to live in groups,
even family groups? Social behavior is hard. Before that, just

seventeen million years had been spent inventing the wasp waist, and
then only another thirty million had been needed to turn the ovipositor
into a stinger (by the way, this is why most bees are female: the
stinger arose from that female reproductive organ, the ovipositor, and
so only females can defend the family)---but even then, the social
challenge had not been solved yet. "After evolving the behavior of
paralyzing hosts with venom, and laying eggs in or near them---wherever
the host animal happened to fall---fifty million years were then
occupied by developing increased levels of transporting the paralyzed
host to a safe concealed location, and building a nest for the young to
develop, and expanding to other kinds of food resources needing more
work like pollen and leaves, and finally defending the nest as a group,
as a family. "Social behavior is rare, and a lot of things have to come
together to make it work---beginning with prolonged care for the young,
but then success is still contingent on many other factors, all somehow
needing to be satisfied together---like having a sting ready to defend
the big investment of the social group. And when everything is in place
and working, a whole world---the whole world---opens up." Here Aynur
paused. This was rare for her. I uncrossed my legs and sat up a little
straighter, folding my hands together in my lap. "I had a difficult
dream about a baby," she said finally, "after I came to California." She
seemed to be struggling with the memory. I gave her some time, not
wanting to risk redirecting her flow even slightly. As I waited---not
being an insect expert---I wondered about mammals, whose close
parent-offspring interactions could have served as a guide for the
creation of social behavior in our lineage as well. That same year of
2018, researchers studying parenting in mice had used optogenetics to
deconstruct this complex interaction---finding individual neuronal
connections governing its sub-features, including projections across the
brain that provided motivation to desperately seek out and find the
young, versus other projections that guided actual acts of caring for
the young--- with each action powerfully governed by a different
connection across the brain, radiating out from an anchor point, just as
we had discovered for assembly of the diverse features of anxiety five
years earlier.

The intense and ancient parenting dyad had created these neural circuit
foundations, which could have been used again for new kinds of social
interactions. An insect that can care for its young perhaps more easily
becomes an insect that can care for its nestmates---and the same idea
would apply to a mouse, or an early primate---by repurposing the same
neural circuits. And all those techniques of caring for young, of good
parenting itself, could have arisen first by circuit repurposing as well
(such recycling seems to explain so much of evolution)---here by
inserting the other individual, the offspring, onto one's own need and
motivation structure, creating a simulation dwelling within, as a trick
to use the self's internal processes to rapidly model and infer the
other's needs. Yet nonfamily social behavior would seem to be
fundamentally more complex, since in families the motivations of both
caretaker and offspring remain---for the most part---certain and
constant. In contrast, the most interesting challenge of true
nonfamilial social interaction is that of keeping up a rapidly shifting
internal model, changing every few hundred milliseconds, to predict
actions of another being with highly uncertain goals. And though many
mammals do show nonfamilial social behavior, it is a fragile construct;
from lions to meerkats to mice, social mammals are often only moments
away from murdering each other. "In the dream I was myself," Aynur
continued finally, "a regular human being like you. I was also a parent,
which was strange---I've only carried a teratoma in real life. But
babies were also different in the dream---born smaller than a thumb,
more like a pine nut, tiny and nearly hairless, like the marsupial
babies that first emerge almost like small drops of pink liquid with
forepaws, born with just enough dexterity to pull themselves along their
mother's belly fur, to find milk and survive. "In the dream, all human
babies were like that, except even more helpless. If you were a human
parent in this world, of course you had no pouch, and no fur on your
belly, and the deal seemed to be that if you had a baby, you just had to
carry it in your hands. "The babies were so small they all looked
similar, like embryos do. But if you had some, you knew, you definitely
knew yours---partly because you could never put your babies down, so you
always had them with you, and carried them on your journeys, wherever
you weaved your way, along the

lakeshore, or through the taiga, carrying your little droplets of human
warmth. "In my dream I lost my baby on the forest floor. I don't know
how it slipped away, or when. I tried to search along the path I had
taken, but the ground was covered in the dying foliage of late fall. I
frantically sifted through the mat of fallen needles and bark, but it
was hopeless: there was so much space to search, and my baby was so
small. "My child was helpless and cold and dying somewhere on the
ground, apart from me. As I searched I could feel a fine thread
connecting us---the baby was me, a part of me, apart and needing me,
though I could not see where in the outside world the thread projected.
But within me, the loss had a definite place, a position in space that I
could feel. It was in my chest, behind my breasts, in those deep muscles
that sweep the arms. The inner feeling, of the loss of a child, had been
mapped there somehow---that was where evolution had set this feeling,
this was how it should feel, to make me do what needed to be done. It
ravaged me as I dug, and drove my arms to seek the piece of my heart
that I had held so long. It was a gap, it was a savage gape, and it made
me dig."

• Aynur's comfort with complexity was not only in the social domain. She
seemed to synthesize every stream of information available, of all
kinds--- her dreams, her memories, her science. Everything was related,
and it all mattered together, and she wove it all together effortlessly.
On the other end, perhaps in a related pattern, the social information
stream that Charles found overwhelming was not the only kind of
information that was aversive to him. As with many people on this
spectrum, he had trouble with unpredictable events in the environment
more broadly (sudden sounds or touches, for example, he found more
distracting than did most other people ---these were even painful). And
so the positioning of different people on this autism spectrum could
boil down to processing all types of information ---not only social;
symptoms were perhaps just clearest in the social domain due to its
uniquely high rate of information flow. Thinking of the rate of all
information as the challenge in this way, rather than just social
information, could also usefully explain unpredictability as

a key problem in autism. Only unpredictable data is really information;
if a person understands a system to the point of predicting everything
about it accurately, then it is impossible to inform the person further
about the system. The challenge with autism, then, seemed to be about
the rate of information itself. I didn't know when treating either
Charles or Aynur, nor do we know now, exactly how information is
represented in the brain---at least not with the same code-cracked
certainty with which we know how genetic information (at the most basic
level) is encoded in DNA. But we do know that neuronal information is
transmitted by electrical signals moving within stimulated cells, and by
chemical signals moving between these cells. And many of the genes
linked to autism are related to these processes of electrical and
chemical excitability---encoding proteins that create, and send, and
guide, and receive the electrical or chemical signals. So the genetic
evidence I knew was at least consistent with the concept of altered
information processing in autism. That idea alone is not specific enough
to be useful in guiding diagnosis or treatment, but numerous other signs
and markers point to altered information flow in autism. Averaged across
the population, people on the autism spectrum exhibit signs of increased
excitability, or triggerable electrical activity, of the brain---such as
epilepsy, a form of uncontrolled excitation taking the form of a
seizure. And in measuring brain waves with the electroencephalogram, or
EEG (external electrodes that can record synchronized activity of many
neurons in the human cortex), certain high-frequency brain rhythms
called gamma waves, which are oscillations coming at thirty to eighty
times per second, show increased strength in human beings with autism
spectrum symptoms. As a result of this evidence, it had been widely
speculated that a unifying theme in autism could be an increased power
of neuronal excitation--- relative to countervailing influences like
inhibition. This hypothesis was well articulated and appealing to many
in the field, in part for its flexibility, since diverse
mechanisms---from alterations in neurochemicals, synapses, cells,
circuits, or even whole brain structure---could implement such a change
in the balance of excitation and inhibition. For example, since the
brain contains both excitatory cells that stimulate other neurons and
cause increased activity, and inhibitory cells that shut down other
neurons, one attractive form of this hypothesis would be that autism
symptoms could

arise from an imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory cells
themselves, specifically favoring the excitatory cells. But how could
such a hypothesis of excitation/inhibition balance be tested? Despite
availability of clinical strategies to dampen overall brain activity,
such as medications to treat seizures and anxiety, these drugs (for
example, a class called benzodiazepines) turn down the activity of all
neurons---not just excitatory cells. Just as the excitation/inhibition
balance hypothesis would then predict, benzodiazepines are therefore
generally not effective for the core symptoms of autism. Autism is
clearly not just increased activity in the brain. Charles, for example,
who suffered from anxiety, had received a benzodiazepine prescription
from me for many years, but this treatment---as I expected--- had not
touched his autism symptoms at all, despite eliminating his anxiety. The
cellular formulation of the excitation/inhibition balance hypothesis,
untestable for so long, finally became accessible with the advent of
optogenetics. If the relevant imbalance in autism---at least in some
forms--- involved excitatory and inhibitory cell types, optogenetics
could be ideally suited to test this idea. We could increase or decrease
excitability of the excitatory or the inhibitory cell types---in
targeted brain regions such as the prefrontal cortex that handle
advanced cognitions---using the microbial light-activated ion channel
genes called channelrhodopsins, and with fiberoptics to deliver laser
light. Mice, like people, mostly prefer being with each other, even in
pairings unrelated to kinship or mating; rather than being alone, they
will generally choose an environment that contains another
(nonthreatening) mouse. Mice also seem to express actual interest in
each other, with prolonged bouts of social contact and exploration. And
the human mutations known to cause autism, when mimicked in mice using
genetic technology, can cause disruptions in this mouse sociability. So
with the generalized success of optogenetics in mice by 2009, it became
apparent that this technology might be used to help illuminate mammalian
social behavior. In 2011 we indeed found that optogenetically elevating
the activity of excitatory cells in the prefrontal cortex caused an
enormous deficit in social behavior in adult mice. Importantly, this
intervention did not affect certain nonsocial behaviors such as the
exploration of unmoving (and therefore quite predictable) objects.

The effect was specific, then, and in the right direction as predicted
by (and therefore supporting) the cell-type balance hypothesis. Even
more intriguingly, and fitting the hypothesis as well, optogenetically
elevating the activity of inhibitory cells in the same already modified
mice, to restore cellular balance, corrected the social deficit. Crucial
to this experiment had been our creation of the first red-lightdriven
channelrhodopsins to complement the known blue-light-driven versions.
This advance allowed us, in 2011, to modify the activity of one cell
population (excitatory) with blue light, and another population
(inhibitory) with red light, in the same animals. That experiment had
shown that elevating excitatory cell activity could cause social
deficits in healthy adult mammals, and that this effect could be
ameliorated by elevating inhibitory cell activity at the same time, to
rebalance the system. In 2017 (in a narrow slice of time after I had
treated Charles, but before I met Aynur), we brought our approach to
mice that were not typical---that had been induced to carry mutations in
genes matching those found in human autism families. These mice (altered
in a single gene called Cntnap2) had inborn deficits in social behavior
compared with nonmutant mice. We found that this autism-related social
deficit could be corrected by optogenetic interventions that were
logically the opposite of what we had done to cause social deficits in
2011. Either increasing activity of inhibitory cells, or reducing
activity of excitatory cells, in the prefrontal cortex (both
interventions would be predicted to reduce cellular balance back toward
the natural levels) corrected the autism-related social behavior
deficit. Beyond this proof of principle---causally testing the cellular
balance hypothesis---we were intrigued by the demonstration that for
these social deficits, both cause and correction could be applied in
adulthood. This was by no means obvious, and certainly the result could
have turned out otherwise. It might have been that the relevant
imbalance occurred only at some inaccessible and irreversible step
earlier in life. If this were the case, the insight would still be
valuable, but treatment interventions would become much harder to
envisage. Our findings did not rule out any possible contribution from
before birth, but did show that at least in some cases, action in
adulthood could be sufficient for both causation and correction of a
social deficit.

These results---turning social behavior up or down by shifting the
balance of excitatory and inhibitory cells---also had illustrated the
broader worth of a particular kind of scientific process, beyond the
intrinsic value of the scientific finding. Here psychiatry had helped
guide fundamental neuroscience experiments, which in turn had helped
illuminate processes that could be going on within unusual human minds
in the psychiatry clinic ---coming full circle in casting light upon
clinical moments as emotionally complex and intellectually profound as
Aynur's immersive storytelling.

• "I know we've gone an hour over our time," Aynur said, filling a pause
that I just realized had existed, in the moment of its ending. "I'm
sorry if you missed your lunchtime. Thank you for listening---I just
wanted to explain. The French doctors wanted me to follow up here, but
I'm not suicidal now. I had a time of weakness, that's all. "I don't
mean to be too dramatic about any of this, but just to say: I could
become weak like that again. Now I know I need my family, and I cannot
live without them. These bonds that created the human way of life, that
maybe allowed us to survive, also might have left a vulnerability. I
don't mean to say all of us would react the same way, but I know I never
felt the weakness so strongly as in those three months, I was so nearly
destroyed by something not related to food, or shelter, or even
reproduction. I almost died, even though I could easily have found ways
to stay in the West, with new friends, and new partners. "I still could.
There were men that looked at me. There was one man that I looked at
too. "We met and talked one night in a café by the stadium. Things
seemed about to explode. How to describe it to you? Eruptive, I want to
say, but I don't know if that's a word. Brimful? So many possibilities.
I wasn't thinking in English then---that was more than six months
ago---but it doesn't matter, none of the languages I know have the right
words. "Nothing happened, anyway. We just drank coffee from clunky
purple cups. And I realized as I walked away, after, that our social
bonds only reinforce a strength we already have built in.

"I knew something the man I had coffee with didn't know, that social
structure came only after the venomous sting. Evolutionary biologists
think that having such a sting was crucial for allowing evolution of
social behavior in the wasp lineage, by providing a remarkable level of
defense for what had been such a small and fragile animal. And I
agree---you can only be social with strong weapons to defend your nest
and young. That strength can free you from harming others. The need to
connect with others is strength---not weakness."

• Extroverts like Aynur, and natural politicians with near inexhaustible
sociability, draw energy from conversations and avoid being alone---an
inversion of the value system of those on the autism spectrum. And like
Aynur and Charles, many people favoring one extreme of social intensity
can find a coerced exposure to the other extreme unpleasant, like
nocturnal mammals forced out into the midday sun. Evolution has helped
the nocturnal mammal to find daylight aversive, because this negative
feeling makes the right behavior happen---which is to retreat from the
light and await conditions that are more suited to the animal's design
and hence less dangerous, and more rewarding. It is similarly possible
that social or nonsocial brain states could be harmful if present under
the wrong environmental conditions, which might help the mismatched
condition (over the long timescales of evolution) become associated with
aversive or negative feelings. Just as different survival strategies are
suited for nocturnal versus diurnal life, there may also be
fundamentally distinct brain modes for different rates of information
processing---each mode of value, but not mutually compatible (at least,
not at the same time). The mode of dealing with a dynamic, unpredictable
system (exemplified by social interaction) may be incompatible, or at
least dwell in tension, with another mode that we need at other times.
This second state would be one that allows us to quietly evaluate an
unchanging system---a simple tool, a page of code, an algorithm, a
calendar, a timetable, a proof---anything static and predictable, for
which the best strategy toward understanding is to take the time to look
at the system from different angles, with confidence that it will remain

unchanged between one inspection and another. Brain states
differentially suited for these two distinct situations might need to be
switched on or off from moment to moment (with relative state preference
tuned across millennia of evolution, and with variation from individual
to individual in the strength and stability of each state). Our
optogenetic excitation/inhibition results were later replicated in
independent mouse lines, but a key question remained: was there a link
between this cellular imbalance shown to be causal for social deficits
in mice and the informational crisis as experienced by Charles (and
perhaps others on the autism spectrum)? Optogenetics helped unearth an
idea for how this linkage might work; in our initial
excitation/inhibition paper in 2011, we also had reported that causing
high excitability of prefrontal excitatory cells (an intervention that
elicited social deficits) actually did reduce the information-carrying
capacity of the cells themselves, in a way that we could measure
precisely, in bits per second. Thus, the very same kind of altered
excitation/inhibition balance that disrupted social interaction was also
making it harder for brain cells to transmit data at high information
rates---corroborating what Charles had described for us in his account
that the information coming in through eye contact overloads the rest.
Another remaining question was the origin of the aversive quality of
information overload---so powerfully experienced as unpleasant by
Charles and others on the spectrum. Being unable to keep up with social
information feels bad in these individuals, but it is not obvious why.
The information overload need not have any emotional valence at all, or
perhaps even could have been positive---a sense of freedom upon
realizing that one cannot keep up, with solace and a kind of peace in
the resulting isolation. Here, though, I did understand, in part through
listening to my patients, how difficult it could be to make your way
through life with others constantly expecting higher social insight than
you could routinely provide. And so the aversion might have been
socially conditioned, learned through a lifetime of mildly stressful
interactions, devastating misunderstandings, and everything in between.
But instead of this aversion needing to be learned, could information
excess be innately aversive in itself, when above a person's carrying
capacity? Certainly everyone, from the typically social to the simply
introverted to the autism-spectrum individuals, can experience aversion

after prolonged social interaction, when social circuitry becomes
exhausted to some extent. It might make sense evolutionarily, in a
long-social species like our own, to have developed a built-in aversion
mechanism, providing motivation to withdraw from important social
interactions when the system is fatigued, and likely to begin causing
errors of understanding or trust.

• "One more thing," said Aynur, as we stood up together---I thought I
had initiated the action, finally needing to prepare for my one o'clock,
but she had responded so quickly and closely that we were moving in
perfect synchrony and then I wasn't even sure who had started it. "I
know they just wanted me to have a onetime evaluation with you, and so
we probably won't see each other again---but you had asked earlier, when
we were talking about my family, how we made the silk to get those
colors, and I didn't get back to that. "This part is really interesting.
I remember when I was little, I most loved the light-pink form of the
tamarisk silks. It made me feel like seeing the flowering tree in
person; the color seems so delicate but the silk is strong, all just
like the tree. I don't know if you've ever seen one. The tamarisk is
such a wonderful bit of life. A desert fir, evergreen but also colorful.
"By the way, there are wasps that lay eggs in the tamarisk tree. Then a
new kind of wood forms around the egg---a growth, a gall: a twisting
ball of nut and root. It's like a teratoma, but it doesn't hurt the
tamarisk. There is no need for the tree to fight it. "I was reading the
other day, the tamarisk is now an invasive species here. You call it a
salt cedar---I like that name. People say it was first brought over here
from Asia just for decoration, and now it's taking over parts of the
American West. The tree thrives in salt, and makes the soil salty too,
which gives it an advantage over the willows and cottonwoods. "In some
areas around here, hikers are apparently being asked to pull up the salt
cedar shoots wherever they are seen, to protect the native plants and
animals. Birds are losing the trees they used to live in---but it seems
doves are okay with nesting in the tamarisk---hummingbirds too. In other
places people have given up fighting, and now just let it go. So there's
a flood of

salt cedar color in parts of the western desert. I saw a picture---you
really need to see it. I wish I could show you. "Anyway, what we do for
silk---I can only tell you about the traditional way my mother taught
me, how we do it slowly, by hand. I don't know how it's done when
mass-produced. We sort the cocoons first, and for the stained and
odd-shaped ones we have to boil them; they all change to the same shade
in water. "Then we stir with a stick, separate the threads, and twist
the threads into strands; we need a few dozen threads to make a strong
strand. To color, we dip each bundled strand into different pigments,
dyeing one strand at a time. I remember this all as very slow,
especially for those fine pinks and purples, the pale and light colors
of the tamarisk tree."

• An ever-growing share of all human interaction appears to lack the
full vivid color of natural social information. By suppressing rich
social multidimensionality, we relieve ourselves of its mental burden
(though we may come to miss, or even crave, this burden once discarded).
We suppress the visual stream of information on the phone, or simplify
the entire social data stream using emails and posts and texts; each of
these methods for reducing data-per-interaction confers a kind of
insulation and enables a higher rate of individual social events, if
desired (though allowing more frequent misunderstandings). The trend
toward increased social partners and contacts, with fewer bits of data
transmitted at each contact, may have already reached a practical limit,
approaching a mode of one bit per interaction (liked or not). That
remaining bit can still be imbued with immense intensity, arrogating
attention, driving passion and intrigue---because the bit is charged
with social context and our imagination: that is, with premade models in
our cortex, ready to run. Human connection in some form is now possible
through only a few words or characters, even a binary flip of a
switch--- obviating some of the pressures of social complexity and
unpredictability. We could perhaps now relax categorizations of
sociability (as a little outdated) that define what is healthy or
optimal based on only the typical high-information-rate in-person social
interaction. People with autism (at

least on the high end of the spectrum) can seem more socially adept if
the interaction is moved out of real time---to low bit rates, as with
text. Though any interaction style still risks errors and
misunderstandings, communication can seem improved if given the grace of
time. The bits to be transferred can be prepared at leisure, and then
discharged when ready with a tap; no reply is needed immediately. These
bits may then be placed in the broader context by the recipient---over
minutes, hours, or days---to be evaluated from different angles.
Possible replies may be considered, and scenarios run forward like a
chess match for two or twenty moves, off the clock---until a reply may
come, a tap or two when ready: Morse for the late-modern human. The
autism spectrum, then, need not be seen entirely as a "theory of mind"
challenge---which has been a popular and helpful idea, holding that in
autism there is a fundamental problem with even conceptualizing the
minds of others. Instead, the bit-rate-limitation idea (which
optogenetics has helped reveal) would perhaps fit more fully with the
experiences of many patients, who are capable enough but require time to
run their models, to fit their own carrying capacities. Psychiatry and
medicine broadly---though still constructed around interpersonal
communication---can survive and operate well with much less social
information than the traditional face-to-face interview provides. I came
to this understanding first as a resident at the local Veterans
Administration hospital, where (under the relentless pressure of
overnight call shifts) I found that the unique human connection needed
in psychiatry can form first through a thin audio channel, the
low-dimensional projection that is a phone call, if extended in time. I
then rediscovered this for myself, also in a time of necessity, as an
attending during the global coronavirus pandemic of 2020. Emergency
psychiatry, I saw again and again, though it somehow surprised me each
time, can be carried out with precision even over the phone, through
that lonely single line. The Veterans Administration hospital rises like
a mirage out of grassy foothills near the university. An oasis of
contradictions, this VA system inspired Ken Kesey's One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest, but is now largely staffed with university-affiliated
academic physicians at the leading edge of the field---and so to this
day, the VA still evokes simultaneously both

psychiatry's prescientific troubled distant past and the
neuroscience-driven promise of its near future. The on-call psychiatrist
at the VA is dubbed the NPOD (neuropsychiatrist on duty). The main
duties of the NPOD (one resident for the whole hospital, all night) are
wrangling emergency room admissions, responding to consults from
inpatient services, and caring for the psychiatry inpatients on the
locked units. A major side job, however, is fielding calls coming in
from the outpatient community, throughout the immense catchment area of
this flagship hospital encompassing all the military veterans who might
be phoning in from home---especially those suffering from PTSD (a common
and deadly disease that is often resistant to treatment by medication).
Page the NPOD: an invocation when all else has failed. In the midst of
other emergencies, the NPOD receives a call forwarded from a veteran
beyond the walls of the hospital: a reaching-in from a human being who
is jangled and guilty and helpless, needing only to talk with someone,
anyone, who might understand. I found these calls could require an hour
or more to work through. Less time would be taken in person, but a
different mode was needed for these purely auditory conversations that
were still sensitive and vital, with the gray specter of suicide
looming. When the call would come, seemingly always near three o'clock
in the morning---perhaps in the middle of a chaotic scramble from the
inpatient ward to the emergency room, or sometimes just as I was going
to try for a few minutes of sleep in the barren housestaff call
room---early in my training it was hard to suppress feelings of anger,
especially since there was no concrete goal for the call, at least that
a combat veteran could typically describe. The patient just needed to
talk---and so I learned to transform myself from efficient physician to
purely empathic partner. Both veteran-aspatient and myself-as-NPOD, I
came to realize, were fighting a new battle in different ways, each
trying not to bring feelings from prior personal trauma into the
present, to not transfer presumptions and imputations from one context
into another. I would often field these pages in the call room, curled
up for hours on the impossibly hard and narrow plastic mattress---still
in scrubs and ready for any urgent summons to the locked unit for
patients with chest pain or needing restraints---but under a thin
hospital blanket to ward off that bone-

chilling pre-morning despair, phone braced uncomfortably between cheek
and shoulder. Not a propitious arrangement for deep connection, yet
somehow by the end of each call, the patient and I could usually both
move on---to the next interaction, the next challenge, or perhaps even
to a shallow snippet of sleep---with a kind of peace, a gift of warmth
from another human being, after a true social interaction drawn out
across the line. The coronavirus sweeping over the planet, years after
my VA service, coerced a retelling of this story in a new way. As
populations from city center to countryside became fragmented, by
design, to manage the contagion, many human interactions either were
forced to play out at a distance or were simply sacrificed. The culture
of traditional psychiatry thus seemed initially vulnerable. Video and
phone appointments (desperately needed as a replacement for clinic
visits during the crisis) were for the first time widely approved and
scheduled; this normalization of virtual psychiatry interactions had
long been possible but resisted by the established clinical structures
for an undeniable flaw: lacking the full information rate of in-person
communication. Younger patients were immediately at ease with video
appointments via the Internet, considering this interaction to be as
natural as any other (and even preferable), but some of my older
patients were uncomfortable with the idea and preferred the telephone.
During one of these audio-only visits ---with Mr. Stevens, a man in his
mideighties I had known for years---I was startled by the immediate
reactivation within me of that intensity of focus and feeling, all
centered on the spoken word: that purely auditory information stream,
that thin squiggle of time-varying sound, which by necessity had guided
so much of my psychiatric caregiving during call shifts in residency.
Mr. Stevens had relapsed into depression four weeks prior (before the
COVID-19 pandemic took hold in California), at which time I had bumped
up the dose of one of his medications. Now as I exchanged pleasantries
at the start of the phone call (taking time even before discussing his
disease symptoms, while knowing that if suicide were a risk, I would
never see him face-to-face in time), I noticed that I had adopted that
familiar life-or-death focus on his timbre and tone and pauses and
rhythms that I had learned with the veterans at the VA---and that I
already knew all I needed to know about his mental status. By the time
we got around to his actual description of

symptoms and feelings, I found we were only confirming what had already
become clear to me, quantitatively and with certainty: that his
depression had lifted by about 20 percent. The most socially adept among
us do this all the time---those beyond my own capability, who without
effort or training or delay can see through the vast avalanche of social
data at just the right angle to find unerringly the meaning of the
moment. But every part of us contains our whole, if reflected upon. Even
with little carrying capacity, connection still comes, with time.

• "I feel like I want to tell you more," Aynur said as we stood in the
doorway of my office. The hallway was quiet, and the carpet looked drab
and dim. "It would be nice to talk again, but I guess I know we won't
ever. I am sorry. I know there is no time, but one more thing: I had a
final moment you should know about, the morning I was to leave Europe.
Not looking at a man, but looking at a girl. "It was six in the morning,
and I was gazing out from my small loft window, drinking the last of my
tea, preparing to leave for the airport, and taking a minute to pause
and reflect---to pay my respects, in a manner of speaking. There was not
really a view of the city, just the gray apartments across the alley,
but I still felt this was a goodbye to Paris, a quiet moment of homage.
I had learned and changed a great deal, and the French doctors might
have saved my life. As I looked out into the light mist of morning,
toward the tenement across the way, a ten- or eleven-year-old girl in a
hijab emerged alone onto the narrow balcony. "I had seen her and her
family before, in passing, in occasional glimpses, the snapshots one
gets. She seemed to have a little sister, and they lived with their
mother and father, who wore traditional dress, not typical French style,
though I did not know the country. But this was much earlier in the day
than I had ever seen her before, and she was alone. She looked out
toward the east, followed by a quick glance back to the darkened
apartment. Her face was set and serious; she was not there to enjoy the
sunrise. "Then she moved to the balcony, to the edge, and turned her
back to the sun, facing west. I held my breath---for her. I had
envisaged myself

jumping, like this, so many times---while looking out this very same
window. "She took out a phone, and hunched over for a moment, then
straightened up and held it out in front of her. In a moment her whole
demeanor had changed; she had become a movie star, her face shining with
fierce glamour. It was just a selfie. "She then returned to her position
hunched over the phone, looking at the image. She remained this way for
almost a minute, and then quickly looked at the sliding glass door back
to the house, which she had left partly open; all seemed well for her,
remaining dark within. "For the next ten minutes I watched, enthralled,
as she flipped back and forth between the two positions. Her next selfie
was another joyful one, then one with a silly duck face, followed by one
with her tongue stuck way out, peace-sign fingers forming a horizontal V
wagging just below her chin. After each one, she bent abruptly into an
intense state of frozen scrutiny. Her focus, her intensity, was
impressive. This seemed a rare stolen opportunity---perhaps her mother
was in the shower and would emerge any moment. Back and forth she went,
on and on, almost puppetlike in the stereotypy of her transitions. I had
always seen her, interpreted her, as a small child with her doll, but
here she was being jerked back and forth by something else, a new
drive---whipped by an unchildlike need. "Eventually she was satisfied.
She slipped back inside, and was gone. "I felt profound sadness, and
joy, and jealousy, all together. Is there a word in English for that?
I've felt that before, those three things together. There should be a
word. All three basic layers of emotion, down and up and sideways, all
wrapped up in a tight and disorganized little ball. "The
jealousy---though we shared faith, gender, youth...our cultures were
still so different. She was still blessed, gifted, able to begin a
journey I could never take. I was bound too firmly to my own, to my
trapped and now tortured people. "My joy came from knowing this was the
outset of her journey, that she was setting off from her family's
homeland, preparing to weave a new fabric of her culture, traveling down
her own road to autonomy. "Though moments like this, of course, must
occur thousands of times a day, every day, around the world, my sadness
might have come from realizing her parents would never know what had
happened on the balcony,

in the way I did, as a complete stranger; this was a poignant hidden
moment of a girl separating from her mother's hand that would never be
shared. The sadness also, I guess, came from my own selfishness---from
feeling connected to this girl in many ways, but realizing I would never
get to know her deeply. I was still feeling vulnerable, or empty---from
my teratoma. From everything. "She was found and lost to me almost at
the same moment. I never existed for her, and never would, and she ended
up only a sort of crossthread in my life---marking a moment---though
with a thread that is strong, and durable, like in that rough ribbon you
have here with ridges and gaps alternating, called grosgrain, where the
weft is even thicker than the warp. "It is strange to say, but the
thickness of her one thread formed a gap around which nothing else can
come close. I came to know her deeply, though it took only a few
minutes, and now she feels lost to me. I don't know how, but I might
need to find my way back to her." OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 4

BROKEN SKIN As willing to feel pain as to give pain, to feel pleasure as
to give pleasure, hers was an experimental life---ever since her
mother's remarks sent her flying up those stairs, ever since her one
major feeling of responsibility had been exorcised on the bank of a
river with a closed place in the middle. The first experience taught her
there was no other that you could count on; the second that there was no
self to count on either. She had no center, no speck around which to
grow. ---Toni Morrison, Sula

H

enry, nineteen years old, had been found rolling naked on the aisle of a
county bus. When the paramedics arrived, he told them that he was
imagining eating people, and saw visions of himself consuming flesh and
bathing in blood. But after his swift transport to our emergency
department by police, Henry gave me, the on-call psychiatrist summoned
to evaluate him, a more relatable story instead, with more universal
themes. He described a lost love that had brought him to despair, to the
aisle of the bus, to suicidal thoughts, and to me. Not even guessing at
his diagnosis yet---there were still too many possibilities---I let my
mind work freely, picturing the scene as Henry described his magical
first moment of romantic connection from three months ago. In her short
fur-lined coat, Shelley had knelt on the torn vinyl seat of the church
field-trip bus, leaned close, and kissed him---just as a sunbeam
unexpectedly broke through the canopy of trees and fog. More used to the
pervasive chill of early spring among the coastal redwood groves, he was
surprised and enthralled by the sudden dense warmth on his skin through
the window glass. Shelley's own warmth, the excited heat from her hungry
red lips, brought her together with the sun in him. She was connecting
him to everything, and connecting to everything in him. But now, not
three months later, everything was lost again---and the midsummer sun
had somehow turned freezing. Henry gestured, showed me how he had
covered his eyes---hands together, fingers interlocking---to

block the sight of her driving away from the parking lot of the diner,
where she had met to break up with him, just two days ago. He had been
shielding himself from the image of her bright red rear taillights, as
she left him to find another. Nothing remained for Henry---he had no
connection to her, nor to anyone else, it seemed. Henry's blockade of
the scene of her departure seemed an oddly immature defense, I thought,
more suited to a toddler than a grown man. He was midperformance,
reenacting here in Room Eight---and watching me instead of his hands,
closely tracking my reaction. As I looked on, and as he lifted his arms
higher, the sleeves of his loose sweatshirt fell back to his elbows,
exposing forearms crisscrossed in fresh razor slashes---crimson, crude,
brutal parallelograms. A big reveal, an intended one it seemed, of agony
and emptiness. His barren core was now visible, through his own shredded
skin. At that moment an image came together in my mind, labeled with a
short diagnostic phrase. All the cryptic threads of his symptoms, each
mysterious on its own, made sense because of their mutual intersection
in that instant: the bloody violence of his thoughts about others, the
cutting of his own flesh, his bizarre behavior on the county bus---and
even the covering of his eyes to not see Shelley go. The phrase was
borderline personality disorder (a label of the moment in psychiatry
that may change in time to something more reflecting symptoms, like
emotional dysregulation syndrome---but which, regardless of label,
describes something constant and universal, a fundamental part of the
human heart). These three deceptively simple words clarified Henry's
chaos for me, made some sense of his bewildering complexity, and in
particular explained the positioning of his mind on the border between
unreal and real, between unstable and stable. He was blocking the
light's path to deflect the harshness of the knowledge it carried,
protecting his raw and damaged depths, asserting crude control of what
could flow into his body across the border of his skin. Though each case
is different, and I had never seen a person with a combination of
symptoms quite like Henry's, new details began to fit the pattern as I
asked more questions. He eventually disgorged again the fantasies of
eating people with which he had shocked the paramedics--- never actually
harming others, but hating strangers on the street simply for

being human. When he saw people he saw their insides, and their insides
inside him. The sun hurt, was cold and strong---and so to re-create the
original feeling when Shelley had kissed him on the church shuttle,
Henry had disrobed on a county bus, seemingly trying to find some patch
of skin where the sun would feel the same. He was seeing blood
everywhere, was swimming, diving, drowning. Good enough for police
transport, state code 5150, to the nearest emergency room, to me. Some
of the people arriving on a 5150 hope to avoid an inpatient stay in the
hospital, while others seek admission. My role was to make the border of
the hospital real, by finding out who needed help to stay alive. My
forced decision as the inpatient psychiatrist was binary: discharge
Henry back into the evening or admit him on a legal hold---to our locked
unit---for up to three days with no right to leave, an involuntary
patient. With the diagnosis now in mind, it was time to think about
writing the note, completing my assessment, and settling on a plan---and
that meant beginning with his first words. I looked down at my notes and
returned to the moment I had walked into Henry's life.

• Before money from our latest tech boom had flooded the region and
brought about the emergency department's modernization, tiny Room Eight
had served for more than twenty years in the valley as a major portal
for incoming acute psychiatric patients. Many of the individuals who
designed and created our densely connected silicon world had passed
through this isolated latrine-sized room at one time or another. The
valley was their home, and this their hospital, and windowless Room
Eight served as the portal to acute mental health care---and thus as a
sort of window into the valley's most human, most vulnerable heart. Room
Eight was important; in a home it matters what can be seen from the
window. But Room Eight was dim and cramped, just big enough for the
patient's gurney. Outside, an amiable, blazered guard stood by. Inside,
a single chair for the psychiatrist was positioned as close to the door
as possible; the ER setting can be unpredictable, and emergency
psychiatrists (like other acutecare medical specialists) are taught to
identify flight paths for themselves,

and to position themselves close to escape routes, in case the
interaction goes awry. On my first contact with Henry, planning a flight
path had seemed relevant. In a baseball cap and jeans, Henry was taller
and heavier than me, unathletic but muscular---and his face seemed to
twist loathingly at the sight of me. I tried to keep my face impassive,
but my abdomen felt knotted and drawn tight in response. I had left the
door cracked open, and as I introduced myself, sat down, and asked what
had brought him in, the familiar cacophony of the ER filtered through:
accompaniment for the first words of his monologue, which as my medical
training dictated, would have to constitute the opening line of my note.
Psychiatrists begin as doctors of the whole body, in emergency rooms and
on general medicine units, diagnosing diseases of all the organ systems,
treating illnesses from pancreatitis to heart attacks to cancer, before
specializing in the brain. In this yearlong all-purpose phase of
internship after conferral of the MD degree, medical rituals are
consolidated--- including the rhythms of how to pass along all the
information about a patient, in exactly the order expected by the
attending physician (the senior doctor to whom the case is presented).
This canonical sequence begins with the trinity of age, sex, and of
course chief complaint, or chief concern---the reason given by the
patient, in the patient's own words, for showing up in the emergency
room that day. The formulation of seventy-eight-year-old woman, chief
complaint of worsening cough for two weeks, is stated before anything
else, before medical history, physical examination, or lab tests. This
ritual makes sense in medicine, establishing focus on the active issue
in a way that is helpful---especially for patients with many chronic
conditions that would together otherwise be a distraction. But medical
custom is not always translated easily to the reality of psychiatry,
especially in the next year of specialty training following medical
internship. It takes a little time for the newly fledged residents, now
in a phase of resetting and relearning, to transpose this medical rhythm
into the new space, since the first thing the psychiatric patient says,
when asked, can be awkward to restate as the first line of a medical
note: twenty-twoyear-old man, chief complaint: "I can feel your energies
in me"; sixty-twoyear-old woman, chief complaint: "I need Xanax to cry
in therapy"; fortyfour-year-old man, chief complaint: "These fucks
trying to control me. You

can't follow me in death now, can you. Fuck you." We write it down
anyway. I had elicited Henry's chief complaint with my stock opener,
asking what had brought him here to the emergency room---and
conscientiously recorded his response, the first line of my note:
Nineteen-year-old man brought in by police, chief complaint: "My father
said, 'If you kill yourself, don't do it here at home. Your mother would
blame me.' " I recalled having so many immediate questions at that
moment, but no pause had been given by Henry---he was only getting
going, opening the veins. The words had flowed quickly, in a fluid and
organized way---and everything, in retrospect, fit the borderline
diagnosis. He implicated that broken relationship as the root cause of
his suicidal despair, the lost perfect love that had begun just a few
months ago with a kiss on a church field trip, and ended two days ago
with their breakup at the diner in Santa Rosa. He had recounted from
there the rest of the abbreviated, tortured odyssey occupying his past
two days---learning to cut himself in secret, going to his father's
house to show him the results, and after his father's stunning
statement, running out the door and down the street, desperately
searching for a bus, in a frenzy to feel what he had felt first with
Shelley. Along the way, Henry included the story of his parents
divorcing when he was three, complete with memories of climbing up on
his mother's lap, crying don't want to get that new dad---but her face
had been composed and set, impassive, comfortable with her son's tears.
He had described the chaos of the divided home that resulted, when those
who most loved each other became overnight those who most hated each
other. How all human values, positive and negative, had been inverted,
inexplicably, inescapably. How he learned to live with two separate
worlds in two houses that could never interact, how he could not speak
of one to the other, how he was forced to create and maintain two
distinct and incompatible realities to survive. And finally before he
fell silent, he entrusted me with the visions he had described to the
paramedics and the ER staff---the images of blood and cannibalism, and
his revulsion for other people. Not just a desire for distance, but a
disgust with all humanity. Earlier as a medical student, I might have
misdiagnosed him with schizophrenia or psychotic depression---dislodged
from the real world

either way. But Henry was lucid, and his thoughts were organized; he had
not quite broken away. Only the person with borderline can travel from
reality to distortion and back, speaking both tongues with dual
citizenship--- not quite delusional, but with an alternative
framework---to help manage a hostile, unpredictable reality. Sometimes
it can seem that both the self and what lies outside the self are not
yet fully defined within the minds of borderline patients---not well
resolved as entities with constant properties and worth. The relative
values of different situations in the world, and of the different levels
of human interaction, seem not smoothly compared---leading to reactions
without subtlety, such as catastrophic thinking about unlikely
possibilities, or extreme reactions to the natural give-and-take of
human relationships. It is as if they are still in an early stage of
developing a kind of currency exchange that allows human values in
different categories to be fairly compared---and so to guide feelings,
and actions, in measured ways. But this pattern of extreme and seemingly
unwarranted reactions (which can also be present in other conditions,
and occasionally appear in anyone) also seems to constitute a practical
strategy for surviving the early-life trauma that so many borderline
patients have suffered, a reflection of their reality that there is not
a single or consistent value system that makes sense in the world. And
other aspects of personal development can seem frozen in early states as
well, such as the use well into adulthood of transitional objects like
blankets or stuffed animals, items that soothe a child when they are
held tight, allowing the security of one environment to be made portable
into an insecure space. Henry's shielding himself from the sight of
Shelley's departure---this was the defense of a child, in blocking
rather than addressing an unbearable, unacceptable reality. All of these
behaviors can be unsettling to friends and family and caregivers---but
with reflection, and with experience, also can stir compassion. Many
borderline patients (and those who are not patients, but who still live
with some of these symptoms) manage to keep private this fragility: the
sudden swings, over an aching emptiness. Some are guarded about a secret
curse too, one that is also a silent deliverance: intentional opening of
their own skin, the volitional cutting of the arms, legs, and abdomen.
These are wounds that need never be shown---except when useful. What
need was fulfilled for Henry here, with the seemingly deliberate
exhibition of his cut

skin? Did he reveal this knowing what would be triggered in the
system---in my system, in me? Borderline patients can seem maestros of
eliciting emotion, bringing forth overwhelming negative or positive
feelings--- approaching their own in intensity, but within others. This
skill can bring desired outcomes, rewards of a sort, including admission
to the hospital (sometimes the underlying goal, even where there is no
suicidal intent). The more I now thought about the timing of Henry's
gesture with his arms, performed while clearly watching for my reaction,
the more it seemed manipulative in the moment, a power grab. He was not
actually a suicide risk, I thought (my thinking swayed by the
demonstrative nature of the gesture), nor did he hallucinate blood, nor
did he want to eat people. Nor was he obviously criminal or antisocial;
as far as my history-taking had revealed, Henry had never harmed a human
being besides himself---not even an animal. And since he had never
actually tried to kill himself, I assured myself that Henry probably
didn't want to die, at least not yet. Though his pain was real, the
showing of his self-harm was something else, a frantic grasping through
borders real and unreal to find care and human connection, reaching
across his own skin into others, diving under and clutching frantically
at the warm blanket of human interaction that could turn cold at any
moment, seeking the deep bond that would never come again. Skin on skin.
His mother's face set, impassive. I had pressing clinical issues going
on---active players on the consultliaison service, transfers from
outside hospitals coming in, and a possible gastrointestinal bleed
brewing on the locked unit. My capacity was not infinite. Henry
suspected this, perhaps, and was telling his story strategically,
knowing that if he did it right I could not easily send him out that
night, alone, into that cold Palo Alto floodplain. He just wanted
something from me, something immeasurably precious: me---my time and
energy. As this realization landed, I felt a rising tingle up my back,
in that sensation of defensive rage that we feel in our skin, when
personal boundaries are violated. Even though I knew his pain was real,
my compassion was to that point only clinical and intellectual. A deep
and shared ancestral state now arose in me that cared nothing for my
compassion. The hairs were rising up, past my neck to my scalp, in that

ancient and furious and privileged experience of mammals---a feeling
that defines our skins, our barriers, and our selves.

• Each emotion has a physical quality, like the bubbly thoracic
sensation of falling in love. The rage of territorial invasion is felt
in our physical boundary, in the skin. In our ancestors this feeling may
have arisen as a posturing, the display of erected hairs to increase
apparent size, but now, for nearly naked humans like us, this feeling
serves only internally, as an unseen legacy felt personally, for our own
use within. And Henry had evoked it in me, he had reached into me,
eliciting the same sense our forebears had felt a hundred million years
ago, as soon as there was hair to erect. The skin organs along the neck
squeeze sockets holding hairs, the hairs stand, the body grows, the
shape presented to the world expands---this is me; there is more of me,
you should know. I matter more. I am more. That feeling---nameless,
universal, compelling---is an entangled inner state of positive and
negative, an exquisite tingle of pleasure and rage. Elevated and
expanded, my perspective grows and I feel myself rising too ---a surge
as the hairs stand. I am emboldened; danger is now to be sought ---risk
is everything; in this moment I can face the consequences and carry them
through to wherever they take me. The boundary is the feeling, and the
feeling the boundary. And then the hairs on my neck and back slowly lie
down; I have a medical license; I am a professional being wearing a
white coat, on a civilized planet, with limits. The wave crests and
recedes. The feeling, with its primal mastery, subsides. I had felt this
before with borderline patients, but perhaps Henry could not know that
he was bringing it forth now. Babies also motivate strong feelings in
parents, without ever being taught to do so. Henry was young and
unschooled, a baby borderline. He was a human mammal from a broken
burrow---burrow broken at three and born then as borderline--- frozen in
time, with childlike defenses, yet with tools at the ready to breach my
own boundaries, to move across my border, get under my skin, and tap my
resources all the way down to my deepest, oldest inner state. The skin
is both border and sentry. Skin arises from ectoderm, in embryos;
ectoderm is our initial boundary, the surface layer of cells,

creating the most fundamental borderline between self and nonself. Our
sense of feeling, our watchtower at the border between self and world,
is built from ectoderm, with skin-embedded organs that detect touch,
vibration, temperature, pressure, and pain. And the brain itself, though
internal today, is built from ectoderm too, and so that layer ends up
setting all boundaries of the individual, psychologically as well as
physically. Hair and fur are also built from skin, and likely came from
whiskers first ---muzzle fibers for touch sensation in our oldest
burrowing ancestors, hiding from the surface-dwelling dinosaurs for
forty million years until a meteor strike upended everything, sending
mammals to the emptying surface sixty-five million years ago as most
other life headed to extinction. These earliest hairs sensed the shape
of the burrow in darkness, the dimensions of passage for the
head---assessing if the self could enter for warmth or escape, designed
to take a measure of earth's intimacy. As whiskers evolved toward
thicker and denser numbers, for increasingly rich sensation in
navigating our dark burrows, we blundered into a new way of building
borders. Thermal insulation with hair was discovered, and then ported
around the body by natural selection in all its blind power. The
burrowing mammals born with denser sensory whiskers also retained more
vital energy---better managing their costly warmblooded lifestyle
fast-burning in the cold of night---and survived the sudden chill of a
blocked-out sun. These predesigned sensory skin organs then spread
across the body over thousands of millennia---where yet further uses
were discovered. Hairs could be raised upon threat along the neck and
back, serving like a rattlesnake's warning; our earliest skin organs,
like border sentries, were now also responding to invasion as a concept
in the external world, as crossed territory, as new topology. And though
raised hairs were an outward signal meant to warn others away, by the
time we (mammals capable of describing inner feelings) had arisen, this
visible sign accompanied something else harbored within. An internal
sense was part of the state, becoming a signal more useful for the self.
Hair---a mere peripheral skin organ far from the brain---was now
reporting on personal territorial integrity that could be psychological
as well as corporeal, and was signaling the invasion both to the world
and back to us.

We (as humanity) would eventually lose most of our body hair once again,
but the feeling itself remained, that exquisite charge of threat and
growth---perhaps the first distinctive mammalian inner state, truly
primal, a sense born long ago in dark tunnels. We sense and define the
borders of ourselves with skin: boundary, sentry, pigment, signal. Skin
is where we are vulnerable, where our heat is lost, and where we must
make contact to live and mate; skin plays many roles, and so bears its
own diversities and contradictions. On our soft ventral sides, along the
midline from throat to abdomen to pelvis---the front of a human being,
derived from the ground-facing aspect of a four-legged reptile or early
mammal---blood flows toward the surface for blushing and swelling, to
reach out, to functionalize, to couple. But our hair-raising, tingling,
rageful, boundary-violated feeling is instead felt and expressed
dorsally, along the back---the more secret, less visible side of human
beings, paradoxically facing away from the individual confronting
us---but in our evolutionary history before standing upright, this was
the more noticeable upper side, where like the ruffs and backs of cats
and wolves, hairs could rise to help us expand our presence. When the
hairs are raised with rage---responding to loss of territorial
integrity---some psychiatrists use that feeling in themselves, when they
notice it, to help diagnose personality disorders like borderline. This
clinical trick, rarely formalized, is an art of psychiatry, if not quite
science---to listen to one's self, to notice the negative feelings
evoked by the patient, to realize that those feelings are likely a
shared response of others in the patient's life, and to use that insight
in treatment. Thus an evolutionary vestige is also a diagnostic tool,
remarkably---with all the caveats one might imagine, including being
wrong---and so the wise physician maintains focus simply on the fact
that the patient is likely to evoke that defensive feeling in others as
well, which can be the source of difficulty in life, and thus the
subject of useful therapy. This transference works with positive
feelings too. For good or ill, the patient or the psychiatrist might fit
into a role from the past that had been created and played first by
someone else in the other's life. By chance or desire, we sometimes find
ourselves to be square pegs for square holes, and if the role is
positive, the therapeutic connection can be strengthened---as long as
the transference is identified, and monitored, and not allowed to

distort the process of care. And indeed, almost inevitably in
retrospect, toward the end Henry let slip a single sentence that helped
me connect with him---unwittingly, or perhaps playing me perfectly. I
had begun to wind down the interview, feeling more certain there was
little risk he would harm himself that night, but still uncertain about
admission or discharge, when he said, I just want my parents to be
together. There, right there, amid the tricks and misdirection, that at
least was true. That was the one thing that mattered. The latent hope to
connect the frayed edges and repair the broken self. A single father, I
heard my son---and felt again, for a long moment, the fragmentation of
our home when he was two. Aware of the transference, and reminding
myself that I could do little--- and understood less---I admitted Henry
on the 5150, completed the paperwork, called the unit, and brought him
in to keep him warm.

• Mostly unresponsive to medications, borderline is a perplexing brew of
symptoms that can seem unrelated to one another: frantic fear of
abandonment, intense mood swings, inescapable feelings of emptiness,
bizarre public displays, morbid visions. Suicide is more common in
borderline than in any other psychiatric disorder, and nonsuicidal
self-injury ---as with the deliberate cutting of flesh---can become
powerful and rewarding, even desperately sought. This is a behavior that
few can fairly claim to fully understand, but cutting is common---and
thus means something about us, about humanity. Unlike in other
psychiatric illnesses---such as schizophrenia where bizarre symptoms
force disengagement, push away others, and isolate the
patient---borderline symptoms can often engage, entwine, and draw in
others, at least for a time. Self-injurious actions like Henry's may
indeed entangle others this way, but seem to serve some purpose for the
patient too, internally. There is already another pain, of a different
kind---and self-injury may work against this deeper, more profound hurt.
We know that many of these human beings have borne an unjust burden:
psychological or physical trauma at a young age, sometimes attributable
to their own caregivers. Henry's only source of warmth, in his tiny
family nest deep in the chill of a redwood grove, had been not just
disrupted, but also

upended---inverted in value---and whatever had actually happened with
his parents, Henry's perception and interpretation were clear: he had
suffered greatly when he was very young. But care coupled with pain
still adds up to survival, in a calculus of practicality for adapting to
a hostile and confusing world. If those we trust, those we must trust,
become unpredictable or harmful and borders are crossed, if value
becomes inverted in a fundamental way, then a strange new logic for
staying alive is needed. Survival requires staying engaged with
caregivers, and not everything really needs to make sense if it also
brings warmth. A ruptured world order results in a ruptured emotional
life where nothing is stable but must be stabilized, and where human
connection becomes a dialectic: both desperately needed and utterly to
be avoided. In this light, the ability to work with alternative
realities, in oneself and others, begins to make some sense. The
correlations of these diverse symptoms are real and can be quantified by
epidemiologists. For borderline patients, trauma during
dependency---early in life when warmth and care are needed at all
costs--- predicts nonsuicidal self-injury later. And the human
dependency period is long. We have vast and intricate brains to build,
and a diverse civilization to assimilate---a babelized complexity of
human custom and cognition--- which can best be done with the trust and
speed and accepting nature of the child's brain. Our brains are building
even basic structure---the electrical insulation, the myelin that gives
white matter its whiteness, that guides electrical communication
pathways across the brain---well into our twenties and beyond. As
primates, and as human beings, we keep our skin exposed ---dermal or
neural, borders or brains---available, for use or abuse, as long as we
can. And so primate evolution in the direction of modern humans has
brought us a dramatically longer childhood, with dependency and
vulnerability greatly extended in time. Childhood is now pushed to its
limits, longer already than the mean life span of our recent ancestors,
to the borders of fertility and beyond. Nowhere is this phenomenon more
clear than in the practice of medicine itself, with its interminable
training period. The halls of teaching hospitals are populated with
small clutches of doctors still in residency or fellowship training,
schooling in tight and vulnerable clusters of white coats. They are all
in mid-adulthood but still trying to learn, trying

to find love, and trying to not die---their hair a graying outcropping
of the skin and the self, signaling frailty more than authority. Though
we know why our vulnerable period may be so prolonged, we do not yet
understand the biology of borderline personality, at the levels of cells
or circuits. As always, to approach this question in a scientific way,
we might choose to simplify by reducing the selected question to a
reliable measurement, to a single observable. The reward of pain, of
cutting--- though not unique to borderline---is coupled to the disorder,
and serves as a remarkably clear measurable, reporting on a powerful and
altered human inner state. What makes a human being cut? This is already
a hard question, but one can take it a level deeper: what makes any
being do anything? In different settings, the answer can be reflex, or
instinct, or habit, or to avoid discomfort or pain, or to get a bit of
pleasure, a buzz of reward...but instead, we could imagine a world where
all behavior is guided by pain, and by release from pain. We sometimes
are driven by the seeking of a positive feeling, but an individual can
instead be guided chiefly by suppression of internal discomfort as the
motivation for action. Could behavior be motivated for survival strongly
enough if a species or an individual were to do without pleasure---and
instead just use temporary reduction in suffering as a motivation for
the correct behavior? With a suitable action taken, to promote survival
or reproduction, then an internal pain would be reduced---if only for a
moment. If we were gods designing beings, this strategy might work. What
would a human being look like, act like, whose baseline was psychic
pain, and whose every action was taken to reduce, or distract from, this
pain? We can put off pleasure at any moment, but we cannot as readily
ignore pain. Perhaps, then, pain would be an even more powerful force
for guiding behavior. Reduction of, or distraction from, inner pain
might work as a motivation for just getting up in the morning, or for
socializing with friends, or for protecting children---though the
mannerisms might look odd to us, as we are constructed now. The style
and melody and rhythm of each action would seem off, bizarre and
volatile, of a being living in agony and acting for its reduction. But
such an existence, at least for some, may already be a reality. Such
people might not seem too different from human borderline

patients---our sisters and brothers and sons and daughters, terribly
burdened with negative inner states. Such an insight could also bring
hope for understanding and treatment, because inner states and value
systems can be changed, and may even be designed for easy change. As a
being grows, as the environment changes, as the species adapts and
evolves, valuations assigned to parts of the world--- like the worth of
having a thing or being in a place---must adapt as well. Such internal
value is a currency like any other, and should not be fixed to an
immutable standard that could prevent growth. Instead, value must be set
by fiat---whatever is good for survival---and easily, precisely, quickly
so. From birth onward, as the dimensions of self and life change,
existential dangers---even threats to life, predators---become minor
annoyances, or objects of beauty, or prey. The rush of fear and horror
must fade, must become joy, must morph into the thrill of giving chase.
Changing of value on any timescale---fast with an instantaneous new
insight, slower with growth and maturity, slower still even over
millennia as the world and species evolve together---allows adaptation
to shifting conditions by tuning inner exchange rates for the competing
currencies of suffering and reward. The experiences of borderline
patients, and insights from modern neuroscience, together show that
valence---the sign of negative or positive experience, aversive or
appetitive, bad or good---is designed to be changed, and readily.

• Neuroscientists can now set these exchange rates, adjusting with
precision how likely an animal is to do almost anything, with
optogenetic targeting of specific cells and connections across the
brain. For example, depending on the specific circuits targeted, we can
cause animals to become more or less aggressive, defensive, social,
sexual, hungry, thirsty, sleepy, or energetic--- by writing in neural
activity with optogenetics (in other words, dictating that just a few
spikes of activity occur in a handful of defined cells or connections).
As the subject's behavior changes instantaneously, shifting to the favor
of one pursuit over another, and thus seemingly switching from one
system of values to another, sometimes a psychiatrist cannot help but
think of

borderline patients. These individuals can be swift to react strongly
with value assignments or changes---for example, treating a new
acquaintance or a new psychiatrist as an archetype of the category: the
deepest friend, the best doctor. And this positive categorization so
powerfully expressed can be erased or reversed in an
instant---transitioning (after a caregiver's perceived misstep, or after
attention from a partner is perceived as inadequate) from best to worst,
all the way to catastrophically negative. This binary switching in
people is sometimes attributed to skilled acting and manipulative
intent---but my perspective (shared by many) is that these labile states
are truly felt, overwhelmingly so. Extreme reactions reflect
allor-nothing feelings, subjective states adapted to uncertain life
experience. The survival skills of a traumatized child---though this
does not describe all patients with borderline---become the distortions
of a suffering adult human being, living life in chronic negativity,
with everything framed in terms of what might be strong or pure enough
to distract from unrelenting sirens of psychic pain broadcast throughout
the patient's inner world. There are deep and powerful brain structures
through which these effects can be borne out. Some of these circuits and
cells (like the dopamine cells near the brainstem) broadcast their
influence far and wide, sending connections nearly everywhere in the
brain---including to the recently evolved frontal regions where our most
integrative decision-making and complex cognitions occur, as well as to
older regions that manifest survival drives in their most basic forms.
Positive or negative value can be easily attached by these dopamine
cells to even neutral items like an unremarkable room. With
optogenetics, turning down the electrical activity of dopamine neurons
in the midbrain, by providing a flash of light every time a mouse enters
a neutral room, causes the animal to begin to avoid the harmless room,
as if it were a source of intense suffering. This experiment may be
accessing a natural process, since a different but interconnected deep
brain structure, the habenula, (a structure---so ancient it is shared
with fish---that fires away during hopeless, uncontrollably negative,
and disappointing situations), acts through turning down the dopamine
neurons in the midbrain naturally, just as optogenetics does
experimentally. This circuitry can thus impose sign, or valence, where
none was present before.

It has been discovered that early-life stress and helplessness can
increase habenula activity, and borderline patients may be locked in
constant uncontrolled negativity from their habenula-to-dopamine
neuronal connection---or other related circuitry. Fixed to a baseline of
pain, they may live out a hard-learned lesson about the way the world is
that could have only been internalized by the young. Cutting may reveal
such a negativity of the borderline patient's inner state. This behavior
might recalibrate that negativity, introducing a new, sharp, and fresh
pain that is controlled and understood, rather than the uncontrolled
(and inexplicable) feeling from childhood. So lifelong suffering, at
least for a moment, is renormalized into almost nothing by comparison
with the new self-generated sensation. Intense negativity---as long as
it comes with agency, with control, with a reason---can be desperately
sought. Modern neuroscience may thus begin to reveal how Henry, and
those like him, could come to dwell in such a state, with early-life
trauma seeding negative-valence predisposition into the arable field of
the young and vulnerable mind, and sowing deep instability in the
valuation of human connection. Studying fish and mice, our cousins with
whom we share key ancestors, shows how powerfully and instantaneously
the value of absolutes can be accessed and changed by activity in a few
specific cells and circuits in the vertebrate brain---and thus very
likely in our brains. We each have a narrative in our minds, an
in-progress drawing easeled up and ready to go to explain ourselves and
others, to justify our sense of self and our relationship to the moment.
We carry that depiction around with us, and we also carry those of our
friends and family and others who are important to us, as images which
we consult from time to time. It has been hard for those who most love
and cherish the borderline patient to build such an image---to really
create and hold an internal model mirroring their loved one's narrative
and suffering. But with a little help from modern neuroscience, these
friends and family and caregivers and others can now begin to imagine,
and perhaps nearly understand, living life this way. Early-life trauma
can happen to any animal, but our young may be most vulnerable because
they have the most to internalize. Our evolutionary (and cultural)
strategy for learning has been to lengthen childhood, and so as a side
effect, extend risk. Other animals might for other reasons come to live

in negativity as well, without a means or reason for signaling this
inner state to the outside world, but borderline-like symptoms may most
readily reveal themselves in the context of the complex social networks
of human life--- and when our unique planning and toolmaking allow for
discovery of behaviors like cutting. Even Henry, as I found out later,
did not stumble across that particular innovation on his own.

• Henry had many superficial cuts on his arms that were rapidly healing
and uncomplicated. As borderlines go, he was still mild, still just
figuring it out. Even his known childhood trauma was not so bad, at
least as known to me, at least by comparison with what I had seen in
others---a difficult divorce for sure, but far worse can happen. And yet
Henry's suffering was real. His family was broken, and every experience
that he shared was warped in some way by this fundamental loss, which
was a burden squirreled away whole, unmeted, bending his inner form,
creating counter-confusions of positive and negative, black and white,
reality and imagination, until the only dialectic that mattered was the
one at the heart of everything for him: connection and abandonment,
water and oil, unblendable. For the first three days of our hold, a
measured process of ministration was set in motion---of set rhythm and
duration as with any 5150. The one held, the newcomer, is made warm and
then made available, like a new lion cub introduced to the pride; the
patient is first given a bed, and then in firm and steady ritual is
visited by members of the caregiving team. Several days follow of this
gentle and insistent attention---from nursing assistant, nurse, medical
student, resident, physical and occupational therapists, clinical
psychologist, medical consult team, social worker, attending
physician--- alongside the other patients, all strangers held together
and each with a different reason for landing there. It is altogether a
more complex and challenging brood than could be prepared for by
instinct or intuition. The time spent by any one patient on a locked
ward is typically just a few days, which seems not enough time for cells
or circuits to change fundamentally, nor for significant therapy-driven
behavioral modifications. Yet each morning, a life-or-death judgment
must be made by the clinical

team on the locked ward. As we evaluate patients subject to the 5150,
those truly recovering and those simply recanting cannot be easily
distinguished. All we have to make these judgments are human
interactions and words, alongside published statistics and accumulated
individual clinical experience. This is not enough; still, deep in
danger we estimate the risk, because there is nothing else to do and
there is nobody who knows more. Each day we must decide to continue, or
release, our hold. Even more unsettling, a deadline bears down. By
morning of the third day, the hold expires and the patient is
automatically released into the world even if danger continues---unless
additional steps are taken. Numerology seems the only relevant
consideration in setting the term of this three-day limit, since the
duration maps onto no specific medical or psychiatric process. Three
days, compelling and biblical, Old Testament or New: three days and
nights in the belly of the beast, three days and nights in the heart of
the earth. If acute suicidality continues, two more weeks of care can be
sought in a different kind of hold called a 5250 in the California code.
But then judgment truly comes calling, in the form of a nonmedical
outsider with right of passage into the psychiatrist's territory. This
is the hearing officer, a judge arriving on the unit---trailed by
another visitor, the "patient advocate," who is to play the role of
pushing for release. The doctor (if still feeling that release may be
unsafe) can make a plaintive case to continue care, to keep the
hold---only now, this happens against opposition. This is an
uncomfortable charade, a doctor arguing against someone named the
patient advocate---while the doctor's whole calling and sense of self is
built around helping patients heal in safety. Yet doctor and patient
advocate must rise in battle, civil and gracious yet with secret ruffs
half-risen, necks itching. When animals within a species come into
conflict, natural mechanisms from ancient circuitry can act to minimize
damage. Rituals signaling size (as with measuring wide-gaped mouths
against each other, in hippos and lizards) often allow the smaller rival
to escape safely, and both to conserve energy. This conflict avoidance
works when the stakes are not life or death, as in many mating conflicts
where other such chances are present or may come later; but if
opportunities are sparse, de-escalation of the conflict is harder. In
the hearing on a locked unit, in these rituals, no de-escalation is

possible, and the stakes are existential---truly life or death, but not
for the combatants. The one with life interest in the outcome, the
patient, waits in another room, with no presence or voice. I had won
almost every hearing before this one, and expected the same with Henry.
But after only a few minutes, the ruling from the hearing officer,
coming with godlike finality, was that I had lost. The edict for Henry
was discharge: freedom and danger. With no personal stake in the
decision, I should have found letting go to be easy; but the outcome of
this one was hard for me, and I found myself running through the case
and the hearing in my mind again and again. Objectively I could
understand the hearing officer's decision. Though I was concerned that
Henry had not contracted for safety---he refused to make a promise to
not seek suicide---his self-harm so far had been undeniably nonlethal.
That fact was enough for the hearing officer, and perhaps it should have
been enough for me. I also should have been pleased that such a high
value had been placed on personal autonomy by this decision, since I
valued freedom too. I understood---all sides understood---that if a
secret suicide were planned, it could now proceed, but in this case
personal freedom had been deemed of greater significance than that small
risk, upon the balancing of two categorically different fundamental
values. This subtext is the core conflict of every such
hearing---patient freedom versus patient safety---and thus both sides
are the patient advocates in a real sense. Advocates for autonomy or for
security: there is no older or deeper conflict, and none closer to the
beating heart of borderline. I struggled with this verdict, but I
understood a source of my internal conflict; I was not blind to the
transference. The parallel with my own life was not subtle---at least in
one aspect, the early-life collapse of the home--- and I could not help
but wonder about my own son, only five years old at the time I treated
Henry. While no hint of his affliction ever showed in my son, I did not
have that perspective on the day of the hearing---and Henry developed
his symptoms late. It was not until after his summer breakup, nineteen
and with the sun still cold on his skin, that he had watched a movie on
his laptop showing explicit cutting in a girl of thirteen---and the
concept had clicked, hard, for him. He tried it right away, copycutting
with crude

tools and coarse strokes behind the community college gym, and then went
straight to show his father. Why did he go first to his father, to
reveal his wounds? Perhaps it was simply to make the hurt known, to
connect by shock and blood. But why not begin with his mother instead?
She was the one he had seemed to fault at first: he had pointed to her
as the one who had left the family, the one who had abandoned the nest.
Henry's chief complaint---"My father said, 'If you kill yourself, don't
do it here at home. Your mother would blame me' "---was this the key
clue, a meaningful signature of pathology in his father instead, in ways
that we did not yet understand? These are the mysteries that a few days
cannot uncover; obscured still, Henry's story had not been truly told.
There was no time for deep connection. Henry had somehow revealed little
of importance, that we could grasp anyway, in his two and a half days on
the unit. He did exhibit a superficial form of progress, a decrescendo
of sorts---gradually toning down his violent language, the descriptions
of his desire to die, to drown in blood. But I knew how readily he could
present different stories at different times, depending on what was
needed, and I was not reassured. I wanted the time to help him. If I had
played the hearing differently, I might have found some way. Holds in
California can be placed or extended, not just for suicidality, but also
for danger to others, and for grave disability. But despite Henry's rage
he was not violent, and never had been, to others; his bloody visions
were just that: a churning of violent imagery not coupled to the power
stroke of action. This left only the route of finding evidence for grave
disability; perhaps a plausible argument could be imagined from his
nakedness on the bus, a case to be made for his inability to provide for
at least one of the basic-needs triad: food, clothing, and shelter. But
Henry undeniably had, and knew how to access, resources addressing all
his needs. The bus incident, like his cutting, was serious but not
lethal, and so Henry stepped out of the unit on a foggy Sunday morning.
I watched him walk down the hall toward the escalator and the main
hospital exit, canvas bag over his shoulder. He was uncured, untreated
even, but I told myself there was little more that could have been done.
His was a disorder untouchable by medication, he had wanted to leave
soon after admission, and upon discharge he had refused even my
outpatient referral

for a specialized group behavioral therapy. The clinical literature
predicted Henry's future would include more of these parasuicidal
actions like cutting, that were revenging and rewarding in ways I would
never fully understand. His wounds would heal and then reappear, as
relief continued to come from the act for him---a desired injury, a
counterstrike against internal suffering beyond my imagination. Henry
had no choice; for a time he would have to continue to seek these
stigmata, and to seek others---not skin to skin, but self to self,
coercing human warmth across space and time. His destiny in the long run
could be the mellowing of borderline symptoms that usually comes with
age---but time could instead bring suicide, the ending of the self, at a
rate of 15 percent: the highest incidence for any disease, any burden of
humanity. One hope was that those who cared for him could learn to use
the state he was able to evoke in them, projecting that ancient feeling
of the invaded self, magnified a hundredfold, back onto their own
internal representations of Henry. Powerful empathy can be stoked from
sparks of anger. My own flare of rage had long since died away, though I
knew I was still vulnerable to him, and would always be. Henry projected
into me, and was close to me, as the written word is close to paper. But
I felt that I had exhibited to him only a pleasing dupability, in my
earnestness to reduce his pain. And for a time I couldn't see my son
without thinking of Henry. He had written his story atop my own, like a
medieval monk inscribing new text upon a scraped and reused parchment,
carving symbols of judgment and revelation onto animal skin stretched
thin. OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 5

THE FARADAY CAGE Hegel made famous his aphorism that all the rational is
real and all the real rational; but there are many of us who,
unconvinced by Hegel, continue to believe that the real, the really
real, is irrational, that reason builds upon irrationalities. Hegel, a
great framer of definitions, attempted with definitions to reconstruct
the universe, like that artillery sergeant who said that cannon were
made by taking a hole and enclosing it with steel. ---Miguel de Unamuno,
Del sentimiento trágico de la vida, translated by J. E. Crawford Flitch

T

he new thoughts came with all the surety of a change in season, in a
gathering together of signs. Like the air of early fall, the first few
weeks seemed to bring a shift in pressure in her mind, with a hint of
wind revealing itself---a shimmering of her highest leaves, a rustling
in the neural canopy. She could feel the change in her skin as well, a
subtle tingle, a chill of early fall. The sensation stirred a memory
from a dozen years ago: Wisconsin in September, with her brothers AJ and
Nelson, chasing Canada geese along the lakeside. Winnie had been
seventeen after that summer of lymphoma chemo. Nothing had ever felt so
charged as her return to the outdoors that fall after methotrexate---all
around her and within her, even to her lungs, and to her brain, a mist
of the season had seemed infused, clear and crystalline. In remission
they had said, a likely cure, and they were right. But this time, with
the rustling of the leaves, unsettling intimations had come, borne high
and kitelike on the same ghost wind---and there was a feeling of
openness, of vulnerability, that was not entirely positive. She abruptly
decided to take a month off, which was unprecedented for someone with
her caseload. The team muttered, including her supervisor, but Winnie
had built serious credibility, even a kind of celebrity, winning
allowance after allowance, constructing patent estates from chaos---

wielding her mind like a weapon trained in both law and engineering,
unique in its ability to grapple with interlocking
artificial-intelligence intellectual property families. Her team of
lawyers and staff had filed seventeen hundred patents---counting all the
divisionals and continuations ---for their major client last year alone.
But now she needed a month of leave; there were pressing issues to
address. She was exposed. The first issue was Oscar, who lived in the
townhouse next door. He had installed a satellite dish on the roof over
his deck---and seemed to be preparing to download her thoughts. Winnie
needed someone to pay him a visit, dismantle the dish, and take him into
custody; her homeowner's association security would have been natural to
call in, but they were probably allied with him. Same with the police.
She needed to find a do-ityourself solution, to take care of herself, as
she always had. A trick occurred to her, a temporary countermeasure
against the satellite dish---just a quick kludge, but with a chance of
really working. She dug out a heavy black knit cap, the one with the
reflective Raiders logo she got in college, which she hadn't worn since
her Berkeley days. She put it on and pulled it down tight over her ears.
Right away, everything seemed more contained. It was a bit surprising
that it worked that well, with just the silvery logo of a football team
as an electromagnetic field insulator, but there was no doubt---the
satellite signal felt less likely to get in, or her own thoughts to leak
out. The hat's tightness helped to shape the air around her head, to
separate and clarify borders. This vulnerability was correctable, then,
and a more permanent solution dwelt in engineering. There were
structural changes she could make inside the bedroom wall to reinforce
that border with a conductive material--- installing a true modern
Faraday cage as a shield against the satellite dish signal. She started
working on the wall, and her home tool kit gradually expanded with a few
short drives to the hardware store across town for some more specialized
items---a crowbar, a little chicken wire, some sheet metal, a voltmeter.
But other developments in this strange new season were more disturbing,
and harder to address. Outside her expertise. More biological. At the
center of it all was Erin, assistant to Larry the senior partner,
younger than Winnie and five months along. Erin had become pregnant
clearly to taunt her, targeting Winnie for living alone and not having
children. It was

unprofessional of her, and embarrassing for Winnie, and a little
frightening considering Erin's proximity to power in the firm. Here,
there was no clear engineering solution to address the offensive
behavior. Winnie had to get to Larry himself. Larry was the only one who
could discipline Erin, and he needed to be informed and challenged to
act. So over a weekend Winnie planned an incursion into the upper
reaches of her own law firm---the C-class floor, with all the chiefs and
captains. She mapped out her access plan and rehearsed the conversation
with Larry--- mostly in her head at first, not using her computer or the
Internet, as it could be assumed Erin had hacked everything of hers, and
had long since obtained access to her emails. A lot of her planning
became sketching on paper, elaborate reconstructions of desk
orientations and restroom placements from memory, but then she got
restless, needing to move her body, to do something physical, and so
Winnie went back to her satellite dish countermeasures for several
days---removing drywall, peeling the insulation back from her eastfacing
wall to see what lay behind it, and beginning to arrange the new
metallic shielding. Then came new, darker undernotes to the change in
season, and some were frankly frightening. Over the second weekend of
her leave, she became aware of the grim and gray-lipped
ones---information vampires. Stocky, thick, and strong as ox hearts,
lurking in the shadows behind the dumpsters, they started draining her
energy and thoughts, tapping directly into her. And with this she moved
beyond, into some new phase. This new season was not just wind
shimmering her leaves. No longer just gentle phantom fingers softly
stroking, now it felt more like glumpy digits pinching coarsely,
aggressively, for her cells like grains---her brainpan a helpless, squat
saltcellar. And then, finally, a new voice emerged on Sunday, from
within her head ---mid-pitched, ambiguously sexed---intermittently
repeating the word disconnect. The voice felt familiar in some way, with
a quality she recognized from adolescence, when she once heard her own
thoughts at that pitch, except now much louder and clearer. It was alien
yet deep within her somehow, a shout between her temples. On Monday
morning, Winnie decided it was Erin, and knew that she had endured
enough. She steeled herself, stepped out of her townhouse, and

climbed into her car. The drive itself went smoothly, past the shadowy
parking lot dumpsters without incident, though there was a surprising
sharpness of the stop sign as she turned onto El Camino Real, standing
out in a way that mattered. The acuity with which she felt its eight
edges commanded attention---but a horn blared behind her. Startled, she
drove on. Winnie arrived ten minutes later at her law firm's
oak-scattered Page Mill Road campus. She disembarked carefully. In the
parking lot, near her car, a flattened screw lay on the concrete. She
knew, as soon as she saw it, that they had placed it there as a sign:
they knew she was coming and intended to screw her. The day abruptly
darkened---the atmosphere now ominous---and she nearly turned around and
headed back to her car. An unsettling thought came to her: the screw
revealed their deep access to her plans, since they knew she would be
there, and therefore they had so much more---her personal life, her
private records, her healthcare even. And she had gone through a
miscarriage just a few days ago...though as she thought about that, her
blood rising, Winnie felt her grip on her own experience loosen. She
became not completely, not 100 percent certain there had been a
miscarriage. She could not picture the experience or any details;
suddenly, it was a little hard to remember what actually had
happened...as if that inner wind whipping up to a tornado had stripped
her branches nearly bare, and her memories were now mostly lost to that
gray-fingered twister, swirling down from a glooming cloud that was
heavy and pregnant with rain. Winnie paused, trembling, standing over
the screw, pressing her temples to process it all, to focus herself, to
consider all the ramifications and uncertainties. A paralegal she knew
distantly---Dennis, something like that, datable she had thought
once---walked past on his way to the main building. He sent an odd look
her way, searching. She turned away, put her sunglasses back on, and
tugged her Raiders cap down tight. Before others, anyone---lawyers,
admins, paralegals---can complicate things, you have to go in now, she
told herself, speaking the words clearly and distinctly in her mind as
if lecturing. You will not back down and run. That little screw message
is just from Erin. Larry can be turned; Larry will be on your side. She
steadied herself and stepped deliberately inside, keeping as far from
the walls as possible; with a tense smile she showed her badge to the

security guard at the desk, then walked to the elevators and rode up to
Larry's fourth-floor domain. She made a pass by his suite; careful to
avoid eye contact, she was still able to mark Erin at the admin desk,
looking for trouble. Winnie's first tactical mission had been perfectly
accomplished--- identifying what Erin was wearing, that formless yellow
dress. Then she headed to the bathroom, entered a stall, closed the
door, and waited, positioning her line of sight so she could watch
through the crack in the stall door for Erin to come in, knowing it
could not be long. She waited almost an hour, but eventually a flash of
yellow flickered in. Winnie calmly stood up, opening the door to her
stall just after Erin's closed. She walked straight to the bathroom
door, exited left, pulled her hat down tight, and strode back to the
office suite. She'd worked with Larry on a couple of the firm's thorny
international cases, but only at a distance. They were two different
kinds of human being ---diplomat and introvert, schmoozer and
quant---and yet today he'd recognize her, and realize the urgency once
she began to speak. She walked past Erin's empty desk, knocked on
Larry's closed door, and walked in. He looked up from his laptop and
made eye contact. She sat down, confidently, in a chair before his desk.
There followed a great deal of confusion. It could hardly have gone
worse, and it seemed the next moment she was sitting in a cluttered side
room in the human resources offices, waiting for an ambulance, with what
must have been the entire firm security team, perspiring in blazers,
watching her. She had been forceful but scrupulously polite with Larry,
factually laying out the situation---describing how Erin's pregnancy was
an unprofessional gesture planned to humiliate her, providing details of
the email hacking that had transpired since, even telling him about the
screw and how terrifying it was to see---but she had also maintained,
she thought, a reasonable and calm tone. She had kept her face
expressionless, solid as concrete---careful to not upset him with
emotion or gestures---but it all had seemed to spin sideways after a few
minutes. Larry was on the phone, then the first blazer came, then firm
hands on her elbows. With her vision darkening in humiliation, she had
been marched out right in front of Erin. Winnie made sure to give no
route in, keeping her face a mask, with no eye contact---and off they
went, to this windowless room she had never known existed.

The ambulance came a few minutes later. Two men in purple latex gloves
appeared with paperwork and a scattering of tubes and wires. She was
relieved to see them, and desperate to get out of the little room. The
EMTs were both thin and densely muscular like climbers---and courteous,
as they conducted a quick physical exam and asked about her psychiatric
history. She told them the truth: there was no mental illness in her
family. But AJ, her older brother, was different from the rest, with a
way of saying odd, muddled, arresting things. He had never found his
path---but he also never really got the chance. Winnie told the EMTs how
AJ had been found on a downtown plaza, collapsed alone near a bus stop
on a blazing hot day, already dead. It had been an AVM---arteriovenous
malformation---an artery misdirected, its thickly muscled walls jetting
high-pressure blood directly into a delicate vein that evolution had
designed for another job: only for collecting puddles of spent blood,
weakly exuding from the brain. A doctor had said the malformation might
have been a sign of a broader problem, a connective tissue disease---but
nobody ever knew for sure, just that at least one AVM had always been
there, hidden from view deep inside his brain, struggling for years to
cope with the ferocious and incessant pounding of the carotid pulse, its
diaphanous membrane stretched thin until the moment came to burst. She
did also mention her possible miscarriage from a few days ago---she was
still unsure about it, with the memory poised between real and unreal.
They seemed irritated by that uncertainty, which she understood; she was
bothered too. She was certain about her distant cancer, the words so
familiar and fraught, lancinating even now---cutaneous large T cell
lymphoma with central nervous system involvement. She recounted the
clinical course expertly. How it had started with double vision and
headaches...and how since they had found some cancer cells in her
cerebrospinal fluid, the methotrexate had been infused directly there,
into the spinal canal itself, at the level of her lower back. How she
had been completely cured, now going on twelve years cancer-free. She
had some scrapes on her knuckles from the wall teardown she was doing at
home, but she explained that only briefly since they didn't seem to care
much about her renovations. She noticed the EMTs persisted for some time
in asking about drugs, in every which way, perhaps trying to trap her,

but getting the same answer again and again---no drugs, never even a
cigarette, just an occasional glass of wine. In the ambulance, things
finally got quieter, and she had a little more time to think about it
all---a frustrating interlocking puzzle of possibilities. Most likely
her thoughts had been tapped, her plans picked up and sent ahead to
Larry and his team by data vampires. Meanwhile she noticed the
paramedics were calling ahead---to the hospital, they said, but more
likely to the grim and gray-lipped ones. "On a fifty one fifty" they
kept saying--- 50-1-50, or 50-150, or 51-50, which was it? The code must
matter. Was it used to trigger, or accelerate, a download? Normally she
could crack this kind of thing. Winnie pulled her hat down more tightly,
and tried to drift back in time, just a few weeks, to how it all
started, to feel that first exhilarating breath of fresh September air.
Later in the emergency room, the nurses and doctors asked all the same
questions as the purple-gloved gentlemen. They pretended to type her
identical responses on various tablets, apparently never bothering to
talk to each other, in between rounds of prodding and poking with
stethoscopes, blood draw needles, and reflex hammers. They didn't care
about her renovations either, but were very interested in the story of
AJ---oddly far more than the paramedics had been. It got hard for Winnie
to talk about him by the fourth or fifth time. As she gave shorter
versions of his story every time, longer versions came to her, within
her. There were increasingly lengthy pauses---she would stop
midsentence, even midword---as images came sweeping through. Imagined
scenes of his final moments, alone without a sister there to hold him,
with nobody who loved him to cradle his muddled head. AJ---the lost
child, lost long before he died. School was as hard for him as it was
perfectly suited to Winnie and Nelson, right down to their precision
handwriting and their love of logic and engineering. But for AJ, even
odd jobs had never quite worked out, whether in car shops or bakeries.
Every venture seemed to end with befuddled bad luck, poor judgment, or
dumbfounding accidents---though he stayed gentle all the way, until he
fell that blazing summer day. She flew back east for the funeral, and a
wrenching bark of a sob burst from her own body, a sound she had never
spoken or known, when she saw that familiar crease in his forehead
smoothed out, at rest, at last.

She lay curled on her side, on the gurney in Room Eight, and became lost
in imagining AJ's final moments, reliving his run from the bakery to the
bank, the run she and Nelson had reconstructed from scraps of paper in
his pocket and clues from his co-workers, the agitated dash that turned
out to be his last desperate attempt to support an independent life. The
doctors had said the stress of that day, the running, the heat, and the
worry, all had probably brought his blood pressure up, and the AVM had
finally ruptured. Just a frailty waiting quietly, a small thing knocked
loose by a day in which all the things that made his life hard had come
together at once. They could still poke and bleed and scan, but Winnie
was done. Day turned to evening, dry sandwiches and juice boxes appeared
and disappeared...and then a long stretch of nothing.

• A knock came at her door, and a doctor walked in, with disheveled
brown hair and coffee-stained blue scrubs under his white coat. He
introduced himself, seeming to be sort of a mumbler---or maybe he was
just tired. Winnie didn't quite catch his half-swallowed name, but
psychiatrist: that word she heard. Winnie sat up and swung her legs over
the side of the gurney. He shook her hand, and sat in the chair near the
door, saying, "I've seen all the paperwork from the ER team, and I've
spoken with the ER docs. But if it's all right, I'd like to hear from
you, in your own words, how you ended up here today." Winnie looked him
over carefully, and then she rested her gaze in his eyes, taking a
moment to think about his angles, and hers, before responding. At the
end of the day, she needed help, and had found no allies yet. Best to
tell him something, if not everything. "Information vampires," she said.
He needed to know. He wrote it down, and looked right back at her. "All
right," he said, "tell me about that." So she did---well, most of it.
Not every detail, just the hard facts as anyone would see them. The
information vampires were tapping into her brain, draining her thoughts;
that all was clear enough and she could be logical and calm in
describing it, with a surfeit of evidence that she could tick through.
First her neighbor had installed a dish antenna on his roof two

weeks ago to gain better access to her thoughts, but she had a shielding
countermeasure that was in process. She had stopped going to work since
people at work were accessing her, hacking in, trying to decode her
thoughts and feelings. She told him about the screw in the parking lot
too, so he would understand how powerful her enemies were, and why she
had to disconnect and protect herself. Winnie briefly mentioned the
disconnect voice---how it was frightening but also reasonable, speaking
a word she might have thought herself, voicing an idea that she wanted,
but maybe something an enemy of hers wanted too. She explained that the
word was spoken audibly inside, with all the qualities of sound.
Someone, probably Erin, was accessing her mind--- but why, she did not
really know. After a while he began to ask his own questions, in a
pattern different from that of either the paramedics or the other ER
doctors. When he asked about the Raiders cap she was wearing---pulled
down to her eyebrows---she told him plainly, "That's to protect my
thoughts." When he pointed to her gurney and asked why she had pulled it
away from the wall into the center of the room, she answered simply,
"Because I don't know what's on the other side." He circled back to her
renovations, which none of the other doctors had shown any interest in,
asking her for the first time about the wall she was tearing down and
why. In the midst of the doctor's questions, though, his pager went off;
he apologized and went away. She spent an hour alone, looking at the
wall in front of her, and then he came back, rejoining without preamble,
acting as if it had only been a minute. Winnie asked what was going on.
"It was just an emergency on the floor, sorry. I'm almost done here, but
I can tell you what's happening," he said, sitting back down. "We're
waiting for a couple tests to come back, but the bottom line is nobody
can find anything wrong in your body---every test and scan looks normal.
So that means we think what is going on is psychiatric. And the good
news about that outcome is that there are treatments that can help you."
Winnie was not surprised. It had looked increasingly like the ER staff
thought things were headed that way, though it didn't really matter---at
this point she didn't care what they said, all she wanted was to go
home. The ER docs had informed her she was "on a legal hold" and could
not leave until psychiatry had seen her, but now she had seen everyone.
Nothing had

been resolved at home or work, and so she had things to do; in fact it
was possible her work situation might have deteriorated a bit. She asked
him if she could follow up in his clinic; it would be easy to call to
make the appointment when she got home. "Okay, let's talk about that,"
he said. "Would you be willing to stay in the hospital while we figure
this out? And if not, what would you do when discharged, if we could
make that happen?" Winnie didn't have to think about it---that was easy,
she wouldn't cause trouble at work anymore, that had clearly been a
mistake. She would go home, resume her vacation, finish taking down the
east-facing wall, and start ripping out the ceiling too---she was on the
top floor, so it was safe, no risk to anyone. "I'm not staying here,"
she told him, "there is too much to do. I'll just go home and finish my
Faraday cage." He nodded at that phrase, and Winnie asked him if he knew
the principle of Faraday cages, that they were conductive enclosures to
cancel out electromagnetic fields. He nodded again. "Yes, I use them in
the lab all the time," he said. "We put basically mesh cubes around our
rigs. The rig is what we build to measure electrical signals in neurons.
It's a Faraday cage just like you are building. It blocks noise from
other electrical sources that might be in the room, or behind the
wall"---he gestured where her gurney had been before she moved it, at
the edge of the tiny room---"so we can detect currents, even from single
brain cells, even in living animals." Though still wary, Winnie couldn't
help but get a little excited at this connection. She wondered if he
knew of the experimental discovery of this shielding principle by
Benjamin Franklin, and then the beautiful theorem that had emerged from
the physics of electromagnetism, that external fields cannot access the
area within a conducting enclosure. That the field creates a
compensatory distribution of charges on the conductor, one that exactly
cancels out the field itself. A field by its own nature creating its own
annihilation. A thesis truly creating its antithesis. "Information
suicide," she said. He seemed to become restless at that, shifting his
position in the chair. "So there are some things we're worried about,"
he said. "You've told me, and everyone, you don't want to hurt
yourself---or anyone else actually--- and I believe you. But you're
destroying your home, and your plan is to keep doing it, because of the
worry about your neighbor, that he's

downloading your thoughts through his satellite dish. So you're actively
tearing your house apart..." Winnie could tell what was coming: they
were going to trap her here. She searched his lips as he spoke, looking
for signs he was under their control too. Actively destroying her home?
This was not true, not at all. She was doing the only thing possible to
save it. "I have some paperwork for you---here, this indicates you're
going to be admitted, brought in to the hospital tonight, on what we
call a legal hold, which we can do, which we have to do, for grave
disability," he said. "We need to do this because you have a psychiatric
symptom that's causing real problems for you, that we call psychosis,
which means a break with reality. You're hearing a voice in your head,
and you have fears that are not physically realistic, that are causing
you to damage your home, and put your own safety at risk." She felt the
world narrowing, going gray except for a narrow tunnel of distorted
light around his face. "It's now our duty to try to figure out what is
causing this," he said. "There are lots of different possible
causes---and hopefully we can try a medication that could help you."
Words came to her mind unbidden, and she tried to match them to his lip
movements. Soapsuds, waitressless, matilda. The doctor kept talking for
a while longer, then stood up, and she focused back on the meaning of
his sounds. He said he would see her tomorrow since he was also working
in the locked unit during the day that week, and he left her with a
sheet of paper with many words and numbers. Grave disability, she saw,
and 5150. There was that code from the ambulance. Grave. They had her
now. She kept her face still as a fossil, staring straight ahead at the
scuffed yellow wall, not daring to picture what lay beyond.

• The staff administered to her a new medicine that first night, and
gave her an information sheet with it, which she kept to study; it was
called an atypical antipsychotic, and they asked her to sign something
about it.

Whatever else it did, or didn't do, the tiny white pill certainly
knocked her out, and she slept for fourteen hours. When she awoke,
Winnie found herself upstairs, in what they called the locked unit,
among a group of fellow travelers, each a refugee from a different sort
of storm, washed up onto the same shore. Winnie just listened that
morning, not speaking but able to learn from them; it helped that her
own storm had made a kind of landfall itself and expended some of its
energy already, even by the first morning. She could still hear the
disconnect voice, but it was less intrusive, no longer a shout---and she
was able to focus on people more stably, and follow conversations. She
learned how to slash her arms with a toothpaste tube---she didn't do it,
she didn't want to, but she learned it anyway. Two patients were talking
in the breakfast area who had done this before---for different
reasons---and were comparing strategies like recipes. One, a young woman
named Norah, seemed to just want to cut herself a little bit, just to
feel pain and see blood, to leave a mark and have it known. The other,
Claudia, a large woman who could have been the mother of the young-adult
brood, was focused on actual suicide---cutting arteries, letting all the
blood out. Claudia was about to start electroconvulsive therapy
treatment for severe depression---the doctors thought it would help, but
Claudia had a different plan. She was utterly invested in ending her
life. All her feelings and thoughts led there, currents joining into one
flow that could not be slowed or diverted by wall or lock. But the unit
staff were a step ahead, it seemed---not even a toothpaste tube was
available. The nurses were mostly miraculous---with only words and
gestures, they managed to maintain peace among twenty altered and
demonstrative men and women. The unit was like nothing else Winnie had
experienced---a contradictory place, both hard and soft, desperate and
secure. And the other patients---she could spend an eternity
contemplating their individually damaged worlds. The unit was a
maelstrom of fascinating and frightening alternate realities. Winnie
thought about the toothpaste, how the bottom of the tube worked for this
job. Its stiffness sufficed; it had the right material properties for
sharpenability. She pictured Norah and Claudia each as they had been in
other inpatient settings, on less restricted units in the hospital,
surreptitiously grinding the end of their tubes on any gritty surface,
getting

in a few or a few hundred strokes here or there when they could isolate
themselves from staff. Winnie thought about how compelling repetitive
action could be---with needle or knife---repeating the same action again
and again, hundreds, thousands of times. She had an odd idea---that
rewarding the act of repetition was the first achievement of the human
brain. With relentless rhythm, to make a hard thing sharp: a stick, or a
flint, or a bone. Striking again and again, grinding against rock, all
through the winter---but with a different goal: to survive back then,
not to die. Winnie picked up psychiatry knowledge too---not from the
other patients, but from brief conversations with the psychiatrist who
had admitted her---about what they called psychosis. He saw her twice a
day, once around eight in the morning in the room she shared with Norah,
and then sometime in the afternoon, usually in the hallway when they
happened to cross paths. Winnie noticed he seemed as sleepy during the
day as he had at midnight. She liked that he liked Faraday cages, and
she called him Dr. D. As her storm cleared more and more each day, she
began to ask questions. "Psychosis, what exactly is that?" she asked. "I
mean, I think I know, but it's strange to hear you say it---it's an
old-sounding word." "Just a break with reality," Dr. D. said. "It can be
used for hallucinations like that disconnect voice you hear. It also
applies to having delusions--- that's the word we use for beliefs that
are false, but fixed." She considered that. "What do you mean, fixed?"
"This fixity part is important," he said. "Delusions can't be reasoned
away. Evidence does not help. I used to try, for my patients, when I was
still learning. Maybe every psychiatrist has tried---but not for long.
The delusion can't be budged. Some patients have these extremely
unlikely ideas in impenetrable armor, so they can't be touched." This
idea of the fixed belief clicked with Winnie's engineering expertise. It
was like the Kalman filter, an algorithm for modeling complex unknown
systems---in which every guess at the value of a system property comes
tagged with an estimate of the guesser's level of confidence. And more
weight is given, when modeling the system, to guesses with higher
certainty. It made sense to Winnie that the brain should work that way
too, that knowledge should exist only with certainty tags, and that some
types of knowledge of the world---not just the delusional ones---should
be trusted all

the way to the point of fixity, and placed in the brain within a special
bucket called Truth, not subject to hedging or discounting. The category
of Truth would allow fast and simple determination of action without
clock cycles wasted on statistical computation, and allow the brain to
build complex edifices of logic on top of these unquestioned facts. But
she didn't say all that to him. "I think it's not just psychosis that
gets fixed like that," she said hesitantly, feeling pressure to get
everything from her mind out before he walked away, "but also maybe
other ideas." She tugged her Raiders hat down tight---force of habit,
really, she was feeling lately that she did not need to wear it all the
time. "Like trusting your family, and marriage, and religion, and some
kinds of social and political beliefs. It's normal. Every bit of
knowledge should have a confidence number attached to it, and some ideas
should have a perfect score." "I guess so," he said. "I think you're
right, we do need those...rankings, I guess. Confidence estimates."
There was an awkward silence. He look down at his patient list, which
she knew meant he would soon move on to the undergraduate student, the
next room down---blond and smiling and manic and so many words---and
never get back to her. But then he continued. "I think, though, for most
ideas about how the world works, a perfect score would not be helpful.
And some possible explanations for things are so unrealistic--- they
should never get close to becoming such trusted facts." He paused again.
They were standing in the hallway near the nurses' station, an odd pair,
she could see that. She in her hospital gown and Raiders cap, he in his
daytime getup of button-down shirt and slacks---one prisoner, one free,
and patients meandering around them. And yet a connection was there;
they were passing information back and forth, untouched through the
noise, on their own local area network. "These unlikely ideas," he said,
"should never even get access to our minds in the first place, should
never be let loose to rise up into our working active consciousness at
all. Do you think you had any ideas like that right before you came to
the hospital? Distractions---really unlikely, that should have been just
filtered out---before ever rising to the surface." He was talking about
filters, but not quite correctly. In the quieting of her storm, Winnie
thought he might be referring to something she had told him in the
ER---her story of the screw in the parking lot. She saw now that the

idea she had at the time---that the screw had been placed there by Erin
to torment her---was quite improbable. But so what? she thought. Fixity
was seen in delusions, but probably was also essential for healthy
committed behavior---and similarly, allowing consideration of unlikely
ideas seemed to Winnie to be normal and necessary as well. "You know,
allowing awareness of something that's unlikely is not a disease," she
said. "If you're talking about a filter, you should understand how they
work. Optimal filters will still block a few things that you actually
wanted to go through---and also will still allow some things that you
wanted blocked to instead go through. That's for an optimal filter." And
for ten minutes she described for him Chebyshev and Butterworth
electronic filters, and explained how Chebyshev type I filters do
successfully block from going through what is not wanted, but
unfortunately also block a bit of what is wanted, what should have been
passed through. Fine for some electronics, or maybe some nervous
systems, but not for the human brain. A species like ours, with survival
so clearly based on intelligence and information, should not run the
risk of blocking and throwing away potentially valuable ideas. Other
designs, like Butterworth filters, have the opposite weakness: these
discard nothing of potential value, but allow too much to slip through.
"I think the Butterworth design makes more sense for a human brain,"
said Winnie, "or, for all the brains of our species considered together.
Unlikely beliefs held by some are a sign the species overall is working
well." She said she would send him "On the Theory of Filter Amplifiers,"
Butterworth's 1930 paper. Winnie felt it was actually quite important
for him to know that every system operates with an error rate that it
accepts, to balance against some other consideration. "Same with our
electrophysiological signals in neuroscience," he said, seeming to
agree. "We record tiny currents, and so we have to filter out noise to
see the currents, and even the best-designed filters will still block or
distort some useful things and allow through some useless things."
Winnie had more to say, but at least with that she could let him move
on. Now he seemed to know that distortion does not mean disease.

•

The inner voice grew still more quiet over the next day. She also felt
decently stable without the Raiders hat and stopped wearing it. Winnie
could sense something was getting better, though she felt a bit wary
about revealing this to the doctor. He might assign credit to the pill,
and conclude that this illness model he had for her was correct. Dr. D.
dropped the 5150 before it expired; Winnie had agreed to stay
voluntarily on the locked unit until discharge, since the voluntary
unit, the open floor, was full. But she was happy to work with the
current clinical team, while the tests continued. She was on vacation
anyway, she was learning a lot, and home still didn't feel quite safe.
"There are different reasons people can experience psychosis," Dr. D.
said in the hallway, later in the afternoon after dropping the 5150,
"and not all have been ruled out yet for you." "But I thought you
agreed," Winnie said, "that there might not even be a problem, it might
just be my design. Our design." "Yes, well," he said, "as you pointed
out, people could be designed with different filters, just like everyone
has different settings on their sound system. But there's a problem with
that idea....This experience has never happened to you before. As far as
I can tell, you've always been logical and systematic, with a selective
filter---it's maybe one of your greatest strengths, actually. So this
whole thing is not really your design." "What could make things change
then, if they did?" Winnie pressed. "Drugs could do it, but there were
no traces of drugs in your system that we found," he said. "Infection or
autoimmune disease also, but we found no hint of those in your blood
work either. Severe depression or mania could do it as well, but you
have no symptoms of these. Schizophrenia, though, has not been ruled
out." Winnie had some sense of what schizophrenia was, and it didn't fit
with what she was experiencing. "Doesn't that start in teenagers?" she
asked. "I would have had symptoms long before now." "That's true for
men, but twenty-nine is not atypical for first break in women," he said.
"First break---that's what we say when schizophrenia declares itself,
with visible symptoms like delusions and hallucinations. And sometimes
one's own actions can seem foreign, controlled from outside the body---"

"Are there theories for what causes hallucinations?" she asked. "What
could be the biology of something like that?" "Scientifically, nobody
really knows," he said. "Some people think that inner voices---like that
one you hear---might be caused by one part of your brain not knowing
what another part is doing, the brain not recognizing its own inner
thoughts as itself. And so your own internal narrative, like the word
disconnect, gets heard, and interpreted, as the voice of someone else.
"Similarly, you could feel that your actions are not your own, but
reflect control from outside. It could just be that in schizophrenia,
one part of your brain has no idea what another part wants or is trying
to implement, and so an action of the body gets interpreted as a sign of
meddling from the outside. The brain---casting around for explanations,
which it always does ---finds only unlikely ideas, like control by radio
transmissions or satellites." "Wait," Winnie objected. "Why are these
explanations always so technological, always beamed information like
that?" She had to get to a resolution, and knew she was running out of
time again. "You know, why satellites? Doesn't that mean this really
isn't a disease? It's more of a recent development, right? A reaction to
technology." "Well," he said, "this feeling of external control and
long-range projection of information, of forces acting at a distance,
was always a symptom as far as we know, long before satellites, or
radios, or any kind of energy wave was known to exist." He started to
drift down toward the next room along the hall, in the pattern she knew
well now, edging toward continuing his rounds. "I have to keep going
now, but I think I can show you how we know this tomorrow." The next
day, as she waited for morning rounds, Winnie wondered if among all the
failure modes of the human mind, schizophrenia might be the least
understood. She herself had heard nothing explanatory, and felt so
ignorant about it, with many gaps and maybe misconceptions. Disorders
like depression and anxiety seemed so much easier to map onto regular
human experience. Still, altered reality could also be universal in some
sense. In college she had learned that while falling asleep most people
can experience brief, bizarre states of confusion and hallucination; she
knew that state herself, and that it was frightening enough for the
instant it lasts---yet what would

life be like if that state came one night and never went away? If that
altered reality, once experienced, became fixed? Entrenched and
unshakable for days, or for years. The idea was horrifying, and so she
stopped thinking about it. The fragmentation of the self as a concept
intrigued her, and was more pleasing somehow to consider---the idea that
one part of her could fail to know what another part was doing. The idea
made her wonder how integration of the self is ever achieved in the
first place. She had always taken this kind of thing, her wholeness, for
granted, but apparently it was not so certain. Again thinking about
sleep helped her understand, since on awakening, she had always felt an
unraveled moment with no reality or self at first, but then experienced
a gradual reconstruction, a reweaving. Short local threads---of place,
purpose, people, things that matter, schedule, current attributes---came
to interlock with long-range threads of identity, trajectory, self.
Where is the information coming from, and where is it going, that
reweaves the self in those minutes? If that process is interrupted, the
result would be an incompletely formed self---and one's own actions
would seem unconnected and alien. As Winnie thought about that
disconnected state, a disturbing thought occurred. What if that
underlying formlessness---needs unraveled from self, action estranged
from plan---is what is real? What looks like confusion and
disorganization in those psychotic states, she thought, might be simply
the reality that our borders are arbitrary, and our sense of unique self
actually artificial---serving some purpose, but not real in any sense.
The unitary self is the illusion. And then, what about that voice,
almost imperceptible now? The doctor had implied she was thinking
disconnect, and not recognizing it as her own thought---but he was
missing the deeper point. Even if the disconnect thought was "hers" in
some sense, who told her to think it? Did she decide, at a moment in
time: I plan to think "disconnect"? No, not for that or any other
thought. The thought comes. For all people, all thoughts just come. Only
people with psychosis are rightly perturbed by this, Winnie realized,
since only they see the situation for what it is. Only they are
sufficiently awake to perceive the underlying truth---the reality that
all of our actions, feelings, and thoughts come without conscious
volition. We all lie on the hard hospital bed prepared for us by
evolution, but only they have

kicked off the thin blanket, the comforter provided by our cortex---the
idea that we do what we want to do, or think what we want to think. The
rest of humanity proceeds through life in dumb slumber, serving and
preserving the practical fiction of agency. The next morning, by the
time Dr. D. got to her on his rounds, Winnie felt convinced that hers
was a state of insight rather than illness. She was not shielded but
rather had emerged, and could sense the field, the charge surrounding
everything. But before she could tell him, it turned out he had brought
something for her, a picture he had printed out---first drawn, he said,
by a nineteenth-century Englishman named James Tilly Matthews, in the
heat of the Industrial Revolution, in the grip of what they then called
"madness." Matthews had imagined something he called an "Air Loom," and
drew pictures of himself as a helpless, cowering figure controlled by
strings projecting through space from a giant and menacing industrial
weaving device. Controlled from afar, by long-range threads. Winnie was
fascinated. So unexplained symptoms and feelings in schizophrenia were
just imputed by patients to their time's most powerful known phenomenon
for action at a distance---whatever it happened to be that might serve
as an explanation---satellite, loom, angel, demon. Winnie had much to
say after that, and she found herself more interested in exploring these
ideas than in pressing for discharge from the hospital. Even if she had
schizophrenia or something similar, it seemed clear to her that this was
not truly a disease, but a representation of something essential ---a
spark of insight and creativity, an engine driving the progress of
humanity. So the next day, she asked Dr. D. to admit that this could be
true, that tolerance of the unlikely and bizarre could be useful---in
the context of the human brain and human hand. Only in this way could
unlikely things--- semi-magical possibilities, concepts unrelated to
anything that had ever existed---become real. Such a setup would only be
of value to humanity; there would be no value for a mouse or a porpoise
in magical thinking, admitting to unlikely possibilities, believing for
no good reason that something strange might be true, that a different
world might be possible--- with no big brain to plan it, or nimble hand
to make it. He was not as excited as she thought he might be. "People
have thought about this," he said. "Not to say that's not an interesting
idea, or that it

doesn't have a certain appeal. It might even be right in some sense. But
schizophrenia is much more, and much worse, than a little bit of magical
thinking. There are also the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, which
prevent patients from even accessing the basic and useful parts of their
mental world anymore. There's an apathy, a loss of motivation, a lack of
social interest. "And then there is a symptom called thought disorder,
in which your whole internal process can become disrupted in a very
harmful way," he said. "Think about thinking for a bit, which you have
been, but now about the flow of thought. We do plan to think a
thing---not always, but sometimes, or at least we can if we wish. We set
out to reason through things, we choose to build a series of thoughts:
imagining paths radiating from a decision point, planning to go through
each of them systematically, and stepping through that sequence. This is
a beautiful thing about the human mind, but this beauty can be
corrupted. Patients lose the memory of their positioning along each
planned path of thought, and even lose the ability to chart the path at
all. Words and ideas get jumbled up together, getting inserted or
deleted too. Eventually thinking itself is shut down completely. We call
that thought blocking---when patients crash out of conversations
midsentence, midword. Thoughts come unwanted, but also don't come when
wanted...and can't be summoned." Winnie knew she had exhibited long
silences in the ER---but she had been thinking about AJ dying. She
reminded the doctor about AJ, saying, "I don't think my silences that
first day were thought blocking, Dr. D. It was just a strong feeling,
from a personal memory that mattered---my brother's death everyone was
asking me about, nothing else." "Okay, yes, that may not have been
thought blocking," he said. "It looked that way---but the good news is
it's happening a lot less for you on the antipsychotic medication. And
thank you for letting me know. We try to visualize what is going on
inside our patients' minds---but thought disorder is not something most
people can vividly imagine, and so we could get it wrong. It's maybe
even the most debilitating symptom in schizophrenia, but extremely hard
to explain." Maybe because this is the most human symptom, she thought,
a deficit in the most advanced brain system, with no analogy in any
other animal or being. But more importantly, control over one's own
thinking is just an

illusion anyway---it's the fantasy of control that is uniquely human.
Thoughts are only ordered after our guts decide what we want, and
fictional thought sequences are built up and installed retroactively.
This perception of order in our thinking is as unreal as agency over our
actions. Both are rationalizations---just neural backfill.

• The day before discharge, he came to update her on the final reading
of her MRI. There was nothing in her brain that they could see---no AVM
like the one that had killed her brother, no tumor, no inflammation.
"What this means," he said, "is that your episode of psychosis might
well be a sign of schizophrenia. We don't know for certain yet, but that
is the working diagnosis. But there's one more test we need to do. We
need to check your cerebrospinal fluid for signs of something that might
be treatable---cells that shouldn't be there, or infectious agents, or
proteins like antibodies. This means we have to do a lumbar puncture---a
spinal tap." Winnie felt herself flinch slightly, remembering the
terrifying length of the chemo needle. "I know, sorry," he said. "You've
had these done before ---yes, it's invasive, but almost painless, and we
know from the brain imaging that you don't have any worrying pressures
in there that would make it unsafe." Her experience as a teenager fully
surfaced itself, uninvited, as he prepared the consent form. Winnie
remembered how she had been positioned on a bed facing the wall, in a
fetal curl to present her lower back---but it was true, she remembered
no pain, just a deep and achy pressure. "It is pretty unusual to do on
this unit, so we'll have to take you to the open floor," he said. "No
needles are allowed on the locked unit, except in emergencies." Winnie
signed the consent, they had her change into a hospital gown, and then
she walked with Dr. D. and the nurse to the locked exit door. The ward
clerk buzzed them through, and she was out in the legal open for the
first time since her admission nearly a week ago. As they set her up in
a procedure room, she considered the irony of what was about to happen:
after her frenzy of concern about long-range access to her brain, here
she was willingly allowing them direct entry, right into her central
nervous system. And they would withdraw material---her own liquid

from deep within her---and keep it, and test it, and enter the results
into databases that would never go away. But she had somehow consented,
and it was all happening. Dr. D. positioned Winnie on her side with a
gentle curl, and with her hospital gown pulled away to expose her lower
back. First came the surface anesthetic: a small stick, from a tiny
needle. The big one would come once he had the location exactly mapped
with his hands. He talked her through it ---"I'm finding the
boundaries...framing the top and bottom lumbar vertebrae, these define
the space, the fourth, the fifth---there it is." After a breathless
pause, she felt that familiar deep ache. The needle was in her spinal
column. It would be a clear liquid, she recalled as she fixated on the
wall in front of her---cerebrospinal fluid, unlike any other in the
body. They would test it for cells, sugar, and ions. CSF, bathing the
brain and spinal cord, cushioning the neurons of thought and love and
fear and need, with just the right salt concentrations of our fish
ancestors, along with a touch of glucose---a little bit of the ancient
ocean we carry with us, sweetened, always. The next morning, he conveyed
the results: more good news. Nothing of concern, all clean; in fact, he
confided, it had been a champagne tap--- which meant the CSF had come
out fully clear with no blood from a nicked capillary, not a single red
blood cell. For residents and interns performing their first LPs, he
said, this is usually occasion enough for a bottle of champagne, marking
a milestone of technical skill along with a little luck. But more
important for Winnie: no white blood cells, no inflammation, no
proteins, no antibodies. Glucose and ions all normal. Another minor side
note: something called cytology was still pending, a detailed analysis
for cancer cells, but lymphoma recurrence was not suspected by the
laboratory. And so this day would become the day of her discharge, as he
had promised---and they would send her home with a prescription for the
new medication, the antipsychotic. "And the discharge diagnosis?" she
asked. "Will you say schizophrenia, or not?" "We still can't be certain,
but schizophrenia is likely," he said. "Some psychiatric diagnoses can
be applied only if everything else is ruled out, only if enough time
passes with no other explanations found. So for now, we'll give our
temporary diagnosis: schizophreniform disorder, which can

be converted to schizophrenia at your outpatient follow-up." An
unappealing prospect---Winnie felt disinclined to let that happen.
Champagne tap---my brain feels like champagne, she thought later, back
in her room, waiting for the discharge orders to go through. She had
liked that phrase he used, champagne tap, and so she began to play with
a more retro image of filtering---moving away from modern electronics,
to more of an Industrial Revolution filtering of bubbles, more like
James Tilly Matthews might have pictured as he pondered his drink.
Bubbles of ideas are seeded deep, guesses to explain the world---why is
that screw there?--- models nucleating on the side of the mind's
champagne flute, rising quickly if able to combine with others in
support to form a larger bubble, a more complete hypothesis, that can
rise more powerfully past filters that can only arrest the small and
weakly moving, the unlikely, the poorly justified. The bubbles that rise
the fastest and grow the biggest, encounter more support and reach the
brim---the border of awareness---only then to burst into consciousness.
Once that burst happens, it's irreversible. It's no longer a guess, it's
Truth---molecules forming part of the oxygen of the mind now. There is
no re-forming of bubbles that is possible; there is no sending them back
into the champagne. And most important of all---sometimes a few little
bubbles that should have been stuck instead slip through. Winnie
thought: Why not send them up? The world is always changing. She was
discharged on the afternoon of her tenth day---the last dose of the
pill, the antipsychotic she had been given daily from her initial
admission, had been administered by her nurse the night before, and she
had a prescription to fill at home, so she could keep taking it. With a
tentative diagnosis---schizophreniform disorder---she was free to go.

• Winnie never filled the prescription or followed up in the clinic, and
never planned to. She felt fine. When she got home she skimmed Dr. D.'s
card across the room and let it lie where it fell by the gas fireplace,
a white marker thrown down where she could see it and remember---and in
the meantime there was work to do.

She felt good going online, not even worrying about Erin. The hacking
conspiracy was still there in her mind, but not as an overwhelming
invasion anymore---more of a polite houseguest. They could leave each
other alone, pass in the narrow hallways of her mind with a slight turn
of the shoulders and a courteous nod. She even felt more secure about
her own body, her own borders. The Raiders hat went back into storage.
As she was reorganizing the closet she came across her old copy of
Benjamin Franklin's "Letters and Papers on Electricity" from 1755 and
went straight to her favorite passage, from his letter to Dr. L------,
describing the discovery of what would become known as the Faraday cage,
savoring again, as she read his words, Franklin's false humility: I
electrified a silver pint can, on an electric stand, and then lowered
into it a cork ball, of about an inch diameter, hanging by a silk
string, till the cork touched the bottom of the can. The cork was not
attracted to the inside of the can as it would have been to the outside,
and though it touched the bottom, yet, when drawn out, it was not found
to be electrified by that touch, as it would have been by touching the
outside. The fact is singular. You require the reason, I do not know it.
Perhaps you may discover it, and then you will be so good as to
communicate it to me. Winnie felt a connection again to the cork. After
a brief and tumultuous emergence, where she had been buffeted by the
fields of an external reality, she had now returned to the silver can,
the shielded cage, the shared and common human frame. There probably
never was a miscarriage though---that idea had become uncoupled from her
also, drifting off, a cinder lost, a dark mote dimming. She ate
ravenously that first week home---with a hunger like nothing she had
felt before. Controlling her own food again was a revelation, a release.
She cooked pasta, bought cakes. Toward the end of that first week, an
odd thought appeared---she was not sure she had a mouth. Even while
eating--- especially while eating---she had to touch her lips to make
sure they were hers, and were still there.

Between meals, the patent lawyer in her reemerged---strong and refreshed
and tireless. Just as at work when tackling a new field of art, she
spent many hours each day at her computer, delving into the scientific
literature, seeking knowledge and precedent. She found her way to dense
and intriguing papers on schizophrenia genetics: the collection of DNA
sequence information from human genomes, with massive teams of
scientists spelling out individual letters of genetic instructions
within tens of thousands of schizophrenia patients. She wandered,
fascinated, through the hundreds of genes found, associated,
linked---that all seemed to play some role in schizophrenia. Each gene
alone had only a tiny effect on the individual human being, with no
single thread setting the pattern, none by itself defining the weave, or
the fray, of the mind. Instead, all the threads together manifested
health or disease: only in unity did they form the full tapestry. It
seemed to Winnie that mental illnesses---schizophrenia but others too,
like depression, autism, and eating disorders---even though heavily
genetically determined, were mostly not handed down across generations
like a watch or a ring, nor like the single genes controlling sickle
cell or cystic fibrosis. Instead, in psychiatry it was as if the risk
were projected forward as a set of many vulnerabilities from both
parents. Each person's mind was created by thousands of crossing
threads, intersecting orthogonally and forming patterns diagonally, to
create the twill of the individual. There were genes for proteins
creating electrical currents in cells, genes for molecules at the
synapses controlling information flow between cells, genes for guiding
the structure of DNA in neurons that would direct production of all the
electrical and chemical proteins, and genes for guiding the long-range
threads within the brain itself, the axons that connected one part of
the organ to another, on an inner loom of interwoven wiring controlling
everything, directing all aspects of the mind, setting traits and
dispositions like tolerance for the unlikely and the weird. In some
people, Winnie realized, when the warp and weft intertwine just so, a
new way of being is allowed---a pattern coalesces with just the right or
wrong set of threads. Hints of what might come can be found on both
sides, forming the family tartan, in those predisposed. Looking back,
partial motifs can be discerned among the vertical or horizontal
threads---human traits as proto-patterns. In both lineages, there may be
found uncles or

grandmothers who were just odd enough, who could let their minds relax
the vise of illusion, who could loosen the grip of an old paradigm, to
close, firm, around a new one. And the stronger the old paradigm---with
more societal inertia---the more certain these outlier human beings had
to be of their new outlook. Their convictions had to be fixed---once
shifted, never letting go--- committed for no good reason, since there
was none. For who can defend the new and unproven against the old and
established? Only the unjustly certain---who believe to a level never
provable, who already must dwell a bit apart and aside, who already can
access now and then the fixity of delusion. But when two highly
vulnerable lineages converge, a person might emerge who is too
disengaged, allowing too much through, having lost control of
thought---or rather lost the reassuring illusion, the perception of
thought's order and flow. A shaken human being is formed who cannot
decide which paradigms to abandon, or which to never let go---who cannot
even pretend to decide anything, any longer, amid the stirred-up
turbulence, the swarms of bubbles effusing and bursting forth unchecked
from the champagne. Then all the bubbles become spent, and the human
being ends with the negative symptoms Dr. D. had described---avolitional
and flat. As Winnie read more about severe schizophrenia, she found it
harder to preserve that idea she had as an inpatient, that there could
be some benefit to the disease---for those suffering, or for their loved
ones. It seemed that the most insidious symptom Dr. D. had described,
the thought disorder, inexorably progresses if untreated, until utter
disintegration. Thinking becomes more and more distorted, until the mind
cannot keep track of obligations and connections, and loses emotional
range, both highs and lows. Gone is any urge to work, to clean, to
connect with friends and family. The mind becomes awash in chaos and
terror, the body frozen and catatonic. If left untreated, the patient's
life ends in confused and bizarre isolation, with the duration of any
planned thought shrunk down to a few seconds or less before its
annihilation. Winnie remembered vividly something the doctor had said in
the hallway, in their final conversation, when she had been repeating
that error need not mean disease. "A group in which some people tolerate
unlikeliness this way may do well over time," he had said, "but don't
forget---some will

suffer terribly." Now in her apartment she wanted to respond, but it was
too late. She wanted to tell him that she understood now, and that this
was not just true, and important, but should be taught to the
community---to advance understanding, to elicit gratitude even---so that
all could truly see the people who were ill, to understand their burden
borne for us. He would probably agree, but what he would not like was
another thing she wanted to say, of which she was just as certain---that
we all need delusion as individuals now and then. She wanted to tell him
that within each person there should be a breakdown in reality at times.
We should recognize this need, in ourselves and each other, and move
with it like music, and sweep each other along, leading or following as
life suggests, since there is not one reality that works for every
decision in each phase of life, for every pair or group or nation. We
have brains and hands; we might make our delusions real. And she
imagined his rejoinder already, since like any good lawyer she could
play his side just as well: that this was fine and romantic to imagine,
but one cannot make anything real, create any complexity, without
controlled thinking, the ability to plan many steps---and schizophrenia
shuts all that down. Evolution has not worked out how to consistently
protect everyone from thought disorder---leaving human minds with a
vulnerability especially destructive in the modern world. Simple and
small primate groups may not have needed thoughts to flow in sequence
for long periods of time---but the stability of our community structure
requires people to live and work together over long timescales, and
allows multistep planning to matter. Winnie knew this perspective had to
be at least a little bit right; she had found plenty of data to support
the idea that civilization contributes to the problems caused by
schizophrenia---including evidence that disease symptoms are more common
and strong in city dwellers. People with only mild genetic
predispositions could still, it seems, be pushed over the edge into
psychosis by other risks and stressors of modern life. Winnie also found
many accounts of perfectly healthy people who became psychotic only
after their first cannabis exposure---and of others with seemingly pure
mood disorders like depression, who experienced delusions only because
of the mood disorder, not schizophrenia. She thought these human beings
probably all had at least the proto-pattern, half-woven. With a tweak
from

the environment, a toxic chemical, a stress from city living or social
disruption, an infection---whatever it might be, Winnie thought, a
second hit on top of genetics can complete the pattern, and change
reality. Two hits: this was a concept she was familiar with from cancer.
Winnie remembered asking her oncologist as a teenager, why her? Why not
Nelson or AJ? Why not her best friend Doris, who smoked secretly every
chance she got? Maybe the two-hits hypothesis could explain this, her
doctor said; maybe Winnie had some vulnerability from genetics, but
mammals have two copies of every gene, and other kinds of backup systems
too, so some second hit was needed to allow the cancer to happen,
through another change in her DNA. It could have been a cosmic ray, a
long-range particle traveling from the sun, or a gamma ray from another
galaxy even, traveling through space for billions of years, and hitting
one chemical bond in one gene in one cell of one young girl in
Wisconsin. This was happening all the time to everyone, but in Winnie's
cell there was already another problem, an altered gene from birth. A
disruption came atop another; it was a double tap, too much, and the
system tipped over into the uncontrolled growth of cancer. Nobody knew
if the two-hits idea was right for mental illness, but Winnie thought it
could be. The science was not there yet in psychiatry, that much was
clear as she spent nights reading the papers and reviews. The biological
knowledge was limiting in this field, though there were a few insights.
There was altered communication across the brain in schizophrenia, shown
with methods for imaging brain activity in people. Parts of the brain
were not keeping the other parts updated. There even had been observed,
during hallucinations, an altered synchrony of activity across the
organ, like one hand not knowing what the other hand was doing. Winnie
had so many questions, so much to say, and nobody to listen. She
remembered he might have said a patient's break with reality had brought
him to psychiatry in the first place. Not that it mattered, but it
mattered, and she wanted him to know that it did. We take our shared
reality for granted, and our reaction to that illusion, and if she could
ask him to do something, it would be to let the world know a simple
Truth: our shared reality is not real; it is only shared.

•

In her second week home a goal emerged, a god took form, a mango ramjet.
She would write to him, in a detailed letter, by hand, in unerasable
black marker, in all caps so nothing would be missed, with everything
she never had time to say, that she hadn't known how to say clearly. She
would tell him more thoughts, mote thoughts. There was a dispersed
element, moonlit underdrumming, a nocturne. Java Pajama Princess was her
new name, that was something to tell him. He might not understand, he
was unbearded, an unjesus. He would write back with his full name, not
what the nurses called him on the floor, that false note, popish. No,
his full name, and she would tell him so, she said she was not of
Dravidian ancestry and did not appreciate the
implication---misogamy---her voice cracking, turning to a weak whisper
even as her helpless anger grew---what was he implying. Not one
kilogauss of influence upon her, she was pure and free, not some
ropedancestepdancing firebrat. Was she eating too much? Lickerish. She
was double-tapped. The influence was coming, the outlet was not easy or
east but westnorthwestwardly. She paused, took a breath, and apologized.
A torsade. It was none of her business what he was trying to imply. Her
phone went off; something clenched her deep. Fillet the firstborn, the
fistborn. It was him. Winnie reached out to the phone, but hesitated.
The other side of the screen. She let him buzz through to voicemail. An
hour later she played the message on speakerphone, after she felt the
phone's capacitors had fully discharged. The cytology report had come
back, from the spinal tap, that last formality: "Rare highly atypical
lymphoid cells, consistent with prior material, involvement by a T-cell
lymphoma." Her engine of a brain revealed at last its dark secret.
Covered over but always there, her frailty had been lying in wait, like
AJ's AVM. And then came the second hit: for him, the pressure surge; for
Winnie, it was cancer cells, stirring up the champagne bubbles, swimming
in her vulnerable sweet sea. She settled to the floor, reaching out
again to AJ's last day. It was not hard; the air loom projected across
time as well as space. And she knew the threads that mattered; some of
them were hers. When he saw the bank clock, AJ knew he would have to jog
the rest of the way. As he ran he looked down at himself and his shirt.
There was some dough baked on there and he tried to brush it with his
hand---most of it came off but there was still some white

stuff that he couldn't wipe away, and his hand was sweating, and it all
made things a little worse. He should have brought another shirt. He
kept up a steady pace, trying not to exert himself too much as he neared
the bank, and jogged across the South Main intersection and into the
plaza, skirted the fountain, and ran through the glass doors just behind
a guy on crutches. He saw the elevator but no time, up five floors two
steps at a time; he walked quickly down the hallway, checked behind him
to make sure he wasn't leaving flour footprints, and stopped just
outside the office waiting to catch his breath. Wiping his forehead he
looked around at the walls and the ceiling; the hallway was very clean
and brown. He thought about the frozen yogurt girl next to the bakery
and her hair, curving up like a cinnamon roll, firm and brown. He
thought about how her eyes had circled around his face, like a nervous
blue jay, when he had asked for her number. After a minute he reached
for the door with a shaky feeling inside, watching the dim and shadowy
reflection of his face in the glass panel of the door, feeling he was at
the crest of a hill, carrying over the summit a large piece of cardboard
in his sweaty hands, to slide it down the summer slope like he did with
Winnie and Nelson when they were kids. He was going to see how things
looked, on the other half of the world, after a long climb getting ready
to coast down. The cries of triumph and pain of the other climbers were
fading into nothing for a moment...as if in respect for this instant.
The door was locked; it took AJ a bit to realize the door was locked. It
was strange---the knob turned but the door wouldn't open. AJ trembled
and tried again. He stepped back then, trying to think what it meant.
His eyes looked for some message or note or clue, but there was nothing.
Wrong office maybe. He reached for the appointment card in his pocket,
but it was the wrong card, it was the mechanic's. He'd brought no
number, going to miss the appointment it had taken him months to get.
His head twinged. AJ pressed his hands to his temples as he walked back
down the hall. He took the stairs slowly, knees buckling, feeling a
strange and surging flood. The lobby was lost in a black fog. Scared, he
walked as steadily as he could through the lobby and out the door. The
sun was hot, but dim. His legs and arms were shaking but he made his way
slowly to the plaza fountain. He walked around the spray, unsteady, and
waited to cross South Main, watching the faces in the cars as they
passed him by. He went to his knees. He remembered a bird he had seen
collide with a glass bus stop once. It had

beat the dusty pavement with its wings for a while, unable to lift off,
and then just looked and watched the other birds fly by, intent on their
own lives, haloed by the sun, to mate and feed and build and sing.
Twilight seemed to be deepening over everything. He thought that he
might see the frozen yogurt girl if he could just get back to the
bakery. I would like to stay there with her, he thought. It was a slight
slope downward; if he could get up all he had to do was swing each foot
forward, one after the other, and he could just almost coast. All the
faces in the cars going home...The door would not open. The door was
locked. The pain in his head rose and spread. So clean and shiny the
glass was everywhere, it looked as though it wasn't even there, the bird
hit and the glass was everywhere. The hallway was long and dim, firm and
brown. It was not easy to see seeing again. Sort of a dove, the bird had
reminded him of Winnie, he had been so worried for her. As he bent over,
the bird looked straight up at him, just like Winnie would, steady and
the only one who would. Waiting for it to pass, he clenched his eyes
shut, waiting for it too. From his knees he fell down flat, and then she
was there with him, smoothing his forehead in a gentling of wings.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6

CONSUMMATION Farewel happy Fields Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail
horrours, hail Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell Receive thy new
Possessor: One who brings A mind not to be chang'd by Place or Time. The
mind is its own place, and in it self Can make a Heav'n of Hell, a Hell
of Heav'n. What matter where, if I be still the same, And what I should
be, all but less then he Whom Thunder hath made greater? Here at least
We shall be free; th' Almighty hath not built Here for his envy, will
not drive us hence: Here we may reign secure, and in my choyce To reign
is worth ambition though in Hell: Better to reign in Hell, then serve in
Heav'n. ---From John Milton, Paradise Lost

T

he medical student and I began to take our leave. Our first ninety
minutes with Emily had brought no understanding and revealed no useful
role for hospitalization. She had been directly admitted to our open
unit by the inpatient psychiatry director, leaving me out of the loop in
determining if admission was a good idea. Emily was eighteen years old,
legally an adult but much younger than our other inpatients, and would
have been sent to child psychiatry if she had shown up just a few weeks
earlier. The initial chief complaint---unable to sit through class---was
actually her parents' complaint, and to me this situation seemed better
suited for the children's hospital than for our acute adult inpatient
service. Over the course of the intake examination, we discovered that
Emily had been a star student, but the full fifty minutes of a class
period had become too much; at the beginning of the school year she had
somehow developed the need to get up and leave class halfway through,
and then over a month

or so, this had progressed to the point that she couldn't go to class at
all. Nobody knew why, and she would not say. We did learn from her that
she was well versed in poetry and literature, and had won trophies as a
softball pitcher and competitive equestrian. During our interview, the
orthopedic surgery ward clerk had paged me several times about a patient
of ours who needed transfer orders to come back to psychiatry after hip
surgery. At this point working with orthopedics, as peevish as they
were, seemed more productive than continuing with Emily, since they
wanted something I could provide. We began navigating around the chairs
toward the door of Emily's room---trying not to seem too hurried,
promising to return. "One more thing," said Emily, and I turned back
from the door. From her cross-legged perch on the tightly made bed, she
was stretching her arms above her head, arching against the sunlight
streaming from the window. "I really don't think I should be alone right
now." Oh. Well, here we go. Now the reveal; the inner storm would
finally break. I waited, not asking. Emily's blue-gray side-eye contact
with me was accompanied by a quarter smile. She said nothing more. The
silence stretched and filled space too. The pressure built, but no
cloudburst came. I looked around the room for insight. There was
oddness: her stillpacked suitcase, and her laptop and phone neatly
stacked on the bedside table---personal possessions that were not a
typical sight even on the open unit. But this I understood---the whole
sequence of our usually choreographed intake process was off, due to the
unusual nature of the admission. She had just arrived and hadn't even
been met by the charge nurse yet. I looked back to Emily. I had waited
for her to continue longer than I normally would, deliberately modeling
for the medical student how to let the patient declare
herself---demonstrating how to not pre-frame whatever it was into
something else, to inadvertently morph the underlying issue into an
object of our own making. And then the silence finally became noise in
itself---negative, distracting ---even a bit hostile. "All right,
Emily," I said. "Let's talk about that." There was no choice but to move
back into the room, with my student in tow. We

returned to our chairs and sat, white coats settling around us like
falling marionette strings. Not only had our history-taking failed to
divine a serious psychiatric condition, but Emily's outpatient lab tests
had also been normal---no hyperthyroidism, for example, from Graves'
disease, which could have explained agitation and restlessness. With so
little information, my diagnostic thoughts felt scattered and poorly
formed, mostly relating to anxiety---maybe a social phobia or panic
disorder. But she had not endorsed any anxiety-related symptoms. I had
also considered ADHD---and had ticked through the symptoms associated
with this term, one of many evolving frames we use in psychiatry for
states we are still working to understand. As insights come from
research, we know our models and nomenclature will be revised and
discarded and replaced in a generation, and then again in another. Yet
these we use because they are what we have now, helping to guide both
treatment and research; each diagnosis comes with a list of symptoms and
criteria. Emily was endorsing none of them. All my direct questions
probing these possibilities---and even my less direct methods, like
open-ended pauses needing to be filled by the patient--- had unearthed
nothing substantial. She had some mild depression but never suicidal
thoughts; a few hints of the eating disorder traits so common in her age
group; and a touch of some obsessive-compulsive qualities. But we hadn't
been able to address the core problem, the chief complaint; we couldn't
explain why she could no longer stay in class. Only as we were headed
out the door, thinking our diagnosis would have to be a placeholder
only---anxiety disorder not otherwise specified---did it seem the real
conversation started. And now, with her cryptic reopening of the
interview, new diagnoses sprang forward eagerly like racehorses charging
from the starting gate---but then all stumbled and crashed into one
another. The straightforward diagnoses were somehow even less coherent
now. If she were intent on suicide, she wouldn't want someone to sit
with her. If she were psychotic, she would be less organized, more
cagey. And finally, a borderline patient would not be so diffident, and
might have led with abandonment more directly. Whatever disorder lay
within was both subtle and strong; she looked physically healthy and did
not seem to be suffering, but something had

overtaken her powerful mind. At this crucial moment in her development
and education, Emily's greatest strength had been taken away; her
passport to the future had been lifted from within her, by a
light-fingered entity she knew, a thief she was protecting. As her last
words hung in the air between us, something else happened to her, to
Emily's scholar-athlete self as shown to me, to her robust and brash
façade. For an eyeblink, the mask flickered and fell, and in an instant,
all was really real. Though she had spoken a truth as she knew it, there
was also a slight twist at the corners of her eyes and mouth. She was
showing me something, and it was almost funny...but not showing too
much, because, well, she was still a teen, and it was still
embarrassing. "Why should you not be alone, Emily?" I asked. She said
nothing more. She was tracing shapes with her finger on the thin and
tightly drawn bedspread, watching me out of the corner of her eyes.
Emily had spoken something important, and yet it seemed there was also a
secret joke unexplained, one that she was tempted to share. Was this all
a deeply disguised malingering, from a clever manipulator of the system,
working for some gain I had failed to perceive? Or was the humor darker
than I could imagine---morbid commentary on a destructive side of her,
with desire for self-harm---a cloaked wraith that she had been fighting
but could not bring herself to disclose, at least until a social
loosening brought on by the moment of our departure. Ten seconds of
silence. What next? I had an ally here, Sonia. I looked over to her.
Sonia was the medical student but also a sub-intern---advanced, and
tasked to behave like a full-fledged intern, playacting at the next
level as if she had MD authority to make treatment plans and write
orders. Sub-I's were expected to perform the doctorly part in each scene
right up to the moment of actually signing each order---a challenging
role-play, designed for medical students who have decided their
specialty, heard their calling, and now are seeking a head start in
experience. It's a difficult line to walk, acting authoritative without
true authority---requiring self-confidence, social smarts, and a
tendency to be right. Strength. And Sonia was strong---fearless and
resourceful, quick with pen and phone, adept at making things happen. It
had been obvious right away, in her first moments on the team---though I
tried not to categorize people

quickly or absolutely, having come through medical school in a harsher
and more binary time, when swift judgments were routinely made by the
team as each new member rotated onto the inpatient care service: a new
face, a blank slate not chosen or known before by anyone present, but
thrust into the midst of urgent life-and-death decisions. When I had
been at her stage, nobody on the team really cared about how creative
the new student might be, or the quality of the papers published---all
of that was irrelevant. A wholly other categorization came into play
that never had existed before in the life of the medical student.
Unforgiving labels were everything: was the new student strong, or weak?
Teams coalesced on snap judgments, right or wrong but made quickly.
Medical students generally suspected little of the importance of their
first few actions upon joining the team, but in that time they would
earn a label ---one way or the other, spoken or not. All was not lost if
things went the wrong way on any one team, since the students would
rotate off the service in a month, moving on to new roles, new growth,
and discovery of new strengths---but that month of time would remain
frozen thus for those who were on the team, never to be undone. In low
moments I wonder: in how many senior physicians' minds am I still stored
in one of these categories--- as strong or weak, and nothing more?
Before meeting Emily, when I was a medical student starting my clinical
rotations---and front-loading the surgery rotations, since I was sure my
residency would be in neurosurgery ---there had been plenty of
opportunity to show weakness. My head was still in the clouds from my
PhD, which had been in abstract neuroscience and so nonclinical in any
sense, and I was more than a bit defiant---stubborn and unwilling to
accept or work with the axioms and rituals of medicine. In my resistance
I was hesitant with medical custom--- and yet sometimes my style, by
chance, fit the team's interests. In an early vascular surgery rotation,
I had no idea what I was doing, but happened to ask an interesting (if
slightly irritating) question on the first morning. As a result later
that same day, on afternoon rounds, I was introduced by the chief
resident to the attending as "the new medical student, strong." The
attending said "Good." How wrong they were, but after that nobody
bothered me---I was in, it would be a good month. The student was
strong. The team, now set and labeled, swept on.

Later, in my resident and attending years, I thought of myself as part
of, and supporter of, a changing culture in which some complexity could
be tolerated---in which doctors recognized that the world needed more
than one approach to doctoring. Sonia was not weak by any measure
though, so when I looked over at her, not knowing what to do, it was for
any of her many strengths she could bring to this nameless domain. We
had been together for two weeks on the same inpatient team, and we'd had
time to get to know each other. She had the same sort of provenance as
Emily: similar academic upbringing, diverse and literary, quantitative.
We exchanged a lot of information in that moment---Sonia was keeping
quiet, as was I, but her slightly widened eyes, locked to mine,
indicated we should explore more deeply. Looking back at Emily, I picked
up no fear, no panic, no anger. Rather, she exuded a kind of nervous
excitement, as if she were getting ready to step out on a first
date---or no, more like an affair---and then I knew. A representation of
sorts, of Emily herself, could be projected onto others I had seen and
stored away inside me, from my time long ago on the adolescent
psychiatry locked unit---and with only a little warping here and there,
the images aligned perfectly. There was another being in that room with
us, one that she needed, feared, and could never leave. Emily opened up
and showed me because it didn't matter, there was nothing she nor I nor
anyone could do. She did have a ferocious date planned; it was happening
and nobody could stop it--- but she wanted it known and witnessed. This
was a straightedge, unaltered, unsophisticated truth she spoke---one
generation stating a hard fact to another---only telling me of the world
as it was. The fact was this: she didn't want to be alone, but I should
be the one afraid.

• By that point, I had treated many patients with eating disorders. I'd
spent months on the children's hospital locked unit, which is
effectively a dedicated anorexia ward, where I had seen patients from
mildly ill to near death, and heard the diverse kinds of language the
teens used to describe anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Some
patients on the mild side of disease even personalized the two disorders
as Ana and Mia, but most

patients on the severe end abandoned all pretense of metaphor for their
illness. The psychiatrists working in this realm have deep intelligence
and experience, yet their constructions (as with much of psychiatry) are
unmoored from the bedrock of scientific understanding, and I had found
no greater mystery than eating disorders, anywhere in psychiatry or
medicine. None greater in all of biology. With Emily, I was cautiously
aware of a particular priming to consider this kind of diagnosis, since
at that same moment I had other such players on the open unit, other
patients in the same domain. Micah, for example: art-dealer kibbutznik,
eyes dark as shoeblack. He had a sharp and closely trimmed Vandyke, and
was frighteningly thin, with a tube snaking up his nose and down his
throat. Micah lived in a very deep and severe relationship, with both
diseases at once, anorexia and bulimia. Dangerously extreme weight loss
resulted, and the contradictions and conflicts were draining. It had
become full-time work for Micah to meet the demands of both diseases, to
give each the time needed. Anorexia nervosa is often personalized as
cruel and strong, a duchesslike mean girl, distant and stern, locking
subjects in a cold tomb of cognitive control. To assert independence
from a survival drive, and to reframe the drive to eat as an enemy
arising from outside the self, anorexia has to become stronger than
anything the patients have known or felt; and the patients start strong
themselves---they would have to, in order to manifest such a thing. With
anorexia, they control the progress of growth and life---and so of time
itself, it seems. Anorexia prevents sexual maturation in the younger
patients, slows aging, and is not cured by medicine; no drug can
liberate patients from its grip, thus forcing desperate measures. When
we were most acutely worried about Micah, watching as his heart rate and
blood pressure dropped to astonishingly low levels, he would allow us to
insert a nasogastric tube to pour some calories directly into his
stomach. But he would then rip out the tube as soon as he was alone,
sometimes before we had a chance to get anything in, so that we had to
go through the process of replacing the tube. I could almost hear
anorexia mocking me from inside Micah's mind as we went through these
motions, as he watched impassively, all three of us knowing what I would
do, all three of us

knowing what he would do, the two of them secretly smiling, laughing at
the tube-wielding drug-mongering chucklehead. But bulimia nervosa is
different. Bulimia brings crazily exciting reward ---not suppressing
food intake to the minimum but pegging it to the maximum---binge and
purge, and binge again. Bulimia seems to create a more positive bond
than anorexia; bulimia can scratch an itch deep under the skin, leaving
the appearance of purity and health while providing the rawest of
rewards. Nothing limits how much bulimia can give you, except how much
potassium you have left in your frail and contorted body before you die.
In all its forms, bulimia knows what you really want, will excite and
hurt you more ways than anorexia, and will kill you just as dead in the
end. Mortal allies and rivals---anorexia and bulimia nervosa---are each
hated and embraced, each a snarl of disease, deception, reward. They
dwell further from the reach of medicine and science than most
psychiatric disorders, in part because a partnership of sorts takes root
between patient and disease. Sometimes crush-like, sometimes hostile,
sometimes only practical---the partnership with the patient is forged,
like many interpersonal pairings in the real world, from a living
dialectic of weakness and strength. And though no drug can cure these
two diseases, any more than a drug can erase a friend or an enemy, words
can reach them as one human being reaches another. That these disorders
are strong, and can be imbued with personhood, creates a situation
unlike any other in psychiatry, or in medicine more broadly. Addictive
drugs---in the setting of substance-use disorders---come closest to this
perception of a controlling external power, though with less personal
connection. Eating disorders exert both forms of power: governing
authority and personal intimacy. The power of either anorexia or bulimia
nervosa, as with the compulsion of drug addiction, still can derive from
an initial, even momentary, consent of the governed. Later this
authority becomes malevolent; freedom is lost as time passes, and
patient and disease move close and closer---until like any stellar dyad,
twin suns spinning around each other, they become locked in a
gravitational well, a hole deep and dark, destroying mass with every
cycle, collapsing into a singularity.

On the pediatric ward I had seen anorexia nervosa in its most severe and
devastating form---a disease dwelling mostly within teenage girls, with
both patients and families consumed. These were uniquely deadly dynamics
I saw, mixing love and anger, with parents frantic to feed their young,
full of fury at this inexplicable monster. Families would blame each
other, with hints and digs and clawed swipes and violent detonations,
since there was nobody else in reach, and no other way to make sense of
their emaciated child, surrounded by yet refusing food. There is no
clearer example in psychiatry of human suffering that would be addressed
just by understanding---even without a cure. These were children who had
been so strong---stars and performers, disciplined across dimensions,
utterly beloved---and yet so starved that their brains themselves were
dying away, beginning to atrophy, shrinking and peeling back from the
skull inside. Children who had become so fragile and cold that their
hearts were slowed to forty, or even thirty, beats per minute, with
blood pressure hard to measure, hard even to find---the biology of life
slowed and almost frozen, maturation arrested and even reversed, the
disease-patient dyad rejecting the impositions and effeminations of the
teen years---age, adulthood, weight---those shared enemies, fusing into
one and denied as one, rejected as a force from without. Children in
mid-teen years with preteen appearance and demeanor---and yet socially
smart, even in the depths of the disease still verbally swift, adept,
expert navigators of cliques and culture, deft at argument, while
failing at that most simple math: the basic topology of survival, the
taking in of food. Many come near death, and some die. Why, ask the
families, please tell us. Why not start by asking the patient, the host
of the disease? Anything verbalized would help our understanding, even
if (or perhaps especially if) in the uncomplicated language and
perspective of a child. But symptoms are hard for patients to explain in
anorexia, as in any psychiatric disease. We can no more expect an
explanation from the anorexia patient than from a person with
schizophrenia when we ask how a hand can feel under alien control, or
from someone with borderline when we ask for insight into the
exhilaration and release of cutting. Some people simply cannot exist as
others wish.

As family and doctors try to step in, to intervene, the patient-disease
pair develops deceptions and dodges, whipped hard and harder from
within. Together they have reframed desire, reshaped the meaning of
need---as can happen with meditation, or with faith---but unsustainably.
Anorexia is strong but causes fragility, and defends itself lethally.
Anorexia preaches loudly in front of the mirror, and then later, off the
pulpit, still whispers relentlessly with sibilant words learned in
secret---a mimic, a hustler, a charlatan within---until in the end the
lie is accepted. The pretense first gains leverage for its utility, but
then grows rapidly to meet the monumental scope of its task. Once
commissioned, the neural mercenaries cannot be recalled, but spin out of
control into a rogue army ravaging the countryside. These are not simple
delusions. In the end, the patient somehow knows but does not
understand, is aware but has no control. The idea lives as a layering, a
battle mask adhered, fused by fire to the face of life. It is a lie
compelling to the patient's life in every way that matters, measured in
the clinic as thoughts, mass, and actions. The doctor elicits and
records anorexia's way of thinking, one of distorted self-image: the
patient states and believes one thing, while body mass index reports the
opposite. The patient's actions too can be measured---reports on the
restriction of food intake, which we can track as the patient does,
rigorously counting all the tiny caloric ticktocks. Immersive cognitive
and behavioral therapies can help in anorexia nervosa---especially if
prolonged, for months at a stretch---using words, and building insights,
to slowly shift the distortions within the patient. The goal is to
identify, and address, intertwined behavioral and cognitive and social
factors, and to monitor nutrition with a touch of coercion. Medications
are used not as cures, not to strike at the heart of the disease but to
blunt symptoms; for example, serotonin-modulating drugs are typically
brought in to treat depression that is often present. In some cases
antipsychotic medications are provided that additionally target dopamine
signals, and can favor reorganization of thinking, to help break the
rigid loops and chains of the distortion; these agents can also cause
weight gain, and so an otherwiseharmful side effect becomes a side
benefit, to some extent. There is much at risk. If including mortality
from medical complications ---the starvation-related organ
failures---alongside the suicides, then eating disorders together show
the highest death rates of any psychiatric disease.

Decline and death come by failure of starving cells, all across the
afflicted human body. Depression and suicide, if the first to fail is
the brain. Infection, if the immune system falters. Cardiac arrest, if
the electrical cells of the heart, already weakened from malnourishment,
can no longer cope with the distorted salts of the blood---imbalances in
levels of ions that had been set billions of years ago by the rocks
dissolved in the ocean of our evolution, and now fishtailing free,
diluted and fluctuating in the daily vagaries of starvation. But for the
survivors, the grip of the inner tyrant fades over time. The patient can
writhe free, and impose by force new thinking and new action
patterns---another layer of masking, perhaps, but still reaching at last
a point, over years, when the story can be told like a nightmare.

• Medications are just as off target for bulimia nervosa---which I
suspected was Emily's secret---as for anorexia: able to blunt some
comorbid symptoms, but still missing the heart of it all. Bulimia is
also a killer with ion imbalance---wild swings in potassium and heart
rhythm that come with the purge. Bulimia sometimes becomes mixed up with
anorexia, as in Micah, together creating even more extreme shifts in
fluids and charged particles---calcium and magnesium derangements too,
in traces of rocks and metals needed to keep excitable tissues like
heart and brain and muscle stable. These cells that twitch and spike
need calcium and magnesium to function properly; otherwise spasms of
spontaneous activity result: fibrillations in muscle, arrhythmias in the
heart, and seizures in the brain--- some ending in death. The purge can
come in many forms: self-induced vomiting, or laxatives, or even
excessive exercise---anything that drives down mass balance. The mass
balance credit is then used for intake---often with binges of food,
piling the plate again and again, caloric reward multiplied by the
illicit thrill of loopholing, from knowing the purge is coming, that
nothing can stop its rush. I knew that bulimia rush, that excited
torture, from my time working with pediatric inpatients, and seeing it
here in Emily I wanted to let her know I knew. If I were right, and if
we could get it out into the open,

together we could form a kind of partnership---a therapeutic alliance.
From there, it would be a matter of logistics: starting some
foundational therapy, building some insight, and discharging when ready
to the right outpatient or residential program for her. "Will you be
able to tell us about it?" I asked, finally pressing. "I can tell you
need to." She was fully avoiding my gaze now, back to the bedspread. "I
can't, really." "Is it somehow related to why you can't stay in class?"
I looked briefly over at Sonia the strong. She seemed enthralled. "Yes,
it is kind of the same." Time to push a little harder; on the inpatient
unit, we did not have the weeks or months of time that outpatient
therapy would allow, and there were other patients too. "Emily, you
mentioned earlier that a long time ago you sometimes would throw up
after big meals." She had described this as remote, and minor, and not
connected to her current symptoms; but now it made sense as a reason to
leave class. "Is it possible that's happening again?" Her finger, which
had been tracing infinities and parabolas on the bedspread, paused; her
eyes remained on the bed, now fixed at a point, frozen. "What would
happen if you were alone, Emily?" I asked. She looked up at Sonia. "I
don't know," Emily said, to Sonia. "Maybe it would be okay. But probably
not." I let a few more beats go by, and shifted in my seat. Sonia picked
up this call and responded. "Emily," she said, "do you want me to sit
with you and talk? I think the doctor has to go see some other patients
pretty soon." "Sure, that sounds okay," she said. "It's no big deal."
She sounded a bit diffident, but it was the biggest of deals; it seemed
that Emily probably wanted to get better. Another page had come from
ortho, I really did have to go, but I could leave Sonia behind to find
out more, to work her new craft, its course now well defined. I buttoned
up, fared them well, and shuffled out of the room. There was no rush
now; time and space were needed for alliances to grow. As I made my way
to the orthopedic surgery unit, I pondered the contrasting appearances
of Micah and Emily. Micah suffered both anorexia

and bulimia, but his bulimia purge strategy involved not regurgitation
but walking whenever he could: pacing, circling, and even
surreptitiously clenching his leg muscles while seated---all forms of
burning calories. A cryptic purge, subtle, not classic bulimia---and
overall he seemed mostly dominated by anorexia. He was inward-directed,
a tight little bundle of sticks. Emily could hardly have been more
different. She was strong, extroverted, energetic, at a perfectly
healthy weight---though who knew, perhaps she swung from one disease to
the other too. During our interview, she had mentioned some caloric
restriction patterns from years earlier. Was there shared biology,
despite how different these two diseases, these two patients, seemed?
Anorexia was a rigid accountant, tracking every calorie and every gram,
suppressing the reward of food; bulimia was natural reward embraced,
amplified, repeated furiously through a cloud of calories. Yet there was
a paradoxical commonality---these two could still coexist, and even work
together. Both were content to kill, but the compatibility seemed to me
to be deeper yet; both achieved a toxic liberation, an expression of
self as dominant over the self's needs. What brain but of a human being
could make such a thing happen? At what moment in evolution did the
balance of power finally tip toward cognition becoming stronger than
hunger? There was no way of knowing, but I guessed it could not have
been long before we emerged, not long before we became modern humans.
Wanting such a thing is not enough. Wanting to live beyond want---that
is unremarkable, and universal. The hard part is making it happen, for
anything as fundamental as feeding. But the modern human mind has vast
and versatile reserves standing by, waiting to engage, to solve
anything---calculus, poetry, space travel. Motive force might be drawn
from many different regions across the rich landscape of the human
brain. Defiance of hunger is no small task, but for a nation of ninety
billion cells it is perhaps not too hard to arouse powerful
million-strong ensembles. Many different brain circuits could even
individually suffice for the uprising, each in its own right a massive
and well-connected neural structure, each adapting its own mechanisms,
its own culture, its own strengths. And so diverse paths might be taken
to anorexia nervosa in different patients, depending on each
individual's unique genetic and social

environment---a complexity already hinted at by the diversity of genes
that can be involved, as with many psychiatric disorders. One patient
might raise an army against hunger by drafting circuits in the frontal
cortex devoted to self-restraint; another might instead work through a
self-taught cross-linking of deep pleasure circuits with survival-need
circuits, learning to affix the attribute of pleasure onto hunger
itself; still others, like Micah, with both bulimia and anorexia,
working with both motion and thought, might find their way by recruiting
rhythm-generating circuits, ancient oscillators in the striatum and
midbrain built for repetitive behavioral cycles. Controlling the walking
rhythms of the brainstem and spinal cord, via compulsive exercise, could
suborn the pleasing rhythms of counting--- for both steps and calories.
With bulimia and anorexia, Micah would be counting both---the calories
coming in and the steps going out, the tick and the tock. Micah had
woven a soft repeating rhythm of the two, their roughknit interlocked
texture absorbing all his blood and salt. Repetition is immensely
compelling. Circuitry for repetitive grooming in birds---maintaining
feathers in form for flight---does not need to provide awareness of any
underlying rationale. Evolution just confers motivation, to loop the
action without logic or understanding, front to back, again and again
and again, pleasing and inexplicable. Or the digging behaviors of the
ground squirrel, badger, and burrowing spider---each of these species
locks the rhythm of the dig to its own specialized frequency, its tuned
neural cycle from central pattern generators. Or scratching in mammals
like us--- every animal has a different dig---getting to the parasite
and rooting it out, driven by the flush of reward that comes with the
scratch as the itch is hit, once started barely stoppable, the rhythm
only heightened in intensity by the necessary damage done to the skin. A
full valence flip---raw pain now raw reward. Our brains play out more
complex rhythms too, spanning time and space, using the metaphor of
these basic motor actions. The same frontal cortex that plans and guides
our scratch with a hand, in lockstep with its deeper partner the
striatum, is also an executive for planning the daily routines, the
seasonal rituals, the yearly cycles. The reward of rhythm shows up
across every timescale, and in nearly every human endeavor: in knitting
and suturing, in music and math, in the conceptual rituals of planning
and organization. Not only actions but repetitive thoughts too can
become as

compelling as any tic; the extension of ancient rhythms to new kinds of
conceptual digging may help us build civilizations---but when the
rhythms grow too strong, some of us become collateral damage: the
obsessivecompulsive cleaners, the hyperaware counters, the groomers, the
scrutineers, all the suffering relentless. My pager went off again as I
entered the ortho unit---it was the psychiatry housestaff office. I
picked up a phone at the nearest nurses' station and called back. It was
Sonia. "She's gone." "Uh...what? Gone?" "As soon as you left, she said
she wanted to sketch her problem for me." Sonia's voice was tremulous,
fear gasping out through every intersyllable. "She asked me to get some
markers, so I ran to the housestaff office, and came right back." She
had imagined the thrill of diagnosis, maybe a publishable case report,
an epic win for her residency interviews. "I was only away thirty
seconds, and when I came back she was just gone. She wasn't on a hold,
so nobody was watching, and none of the nurses saw her leave." "I'm
coming back now," I said. "Sit tight, it's okay." But it was not okay. I
had read her all wrong. Emily had been the cagiest of the psychotic
depressed, suicidal but just wary enough to snooker me. In her own
hidden craft, she had set out alone. The excitement of her final
liberation was what I had been picking up, not knowing, misdiagnosing.
My house of cards had come down, and I was responsible. I double-timed
it back to the unit, just short of a run. Weak.

• It was a complicated situation, but Sonia was right that we had no
control. Emily was eighteen and not on a legal hold. She had never
expressed suicidality, and had the freedom to come and go. There was no
recourse. We buzzed around the unit, looking for clues. She had taken
nothing, and she had even left her laptop and phone exactly where I had
seen them by the bed a few minutes earlier. Not what someone leaving
against medical advice would typically do, if she were just headed back
home or to a friend's house. There was no time, and no need, to speak
our deepest fear.

We paged the attending to update him, though there would be nothing he
could do either. It was on us, on me. Only ten minutes had passed. The
hospital was buttoned-down pretty tightly; even where there was no
locked unit, the windows were generally sealed. If suicide were the
goal, it wasn't clear what route she could take. We were on the
second-floor open unit---I knew how to get to the roof of the fifth
floor, through the hidden rathole of our resident gym, but there was no
way she would find her way there. Sharp edges...the hospital cafeteria,
first floor, almost exactly under our feet? Or worse, just past the
cafeteria, there was a balcony, an overlook into a vast atrium---it was
a long way down from that balcony to the basement floor below. She could
have gotten there in thirty seconds, and anything--- everything---could
have happened since then. Sonia knew the stakes and was feeling it; her
face was hard and I could see, just under the surface, cracking fault
lines of failure and self-doubt. "Okay," I said, as reassuringly as I
could. "She is probably just going to get a cigarette. In fact, that's
probably what this whole thing is---the school stuff too." It was almost
plausible---a flash recall brought me back to second-year residency,
when I had been called in a panic by the labor and delivery unit; a new
mother was demanding to leave right after her Csection and the whole
floor was in a tumult. I had been called as the consult-liaison
psychiatrist to---as the obstetrics resident put it---"I don't know,
place her on a hold or something." After speaking with the patient in
her mother tongue for just ten minutes I got to the real reason---she
only needed to go have a cigarette, and had been too embarrassed to ask.
I savored that small victory for years, in part as crystallization of a
curious and recurring lifelong theme---I had noticed that truth can
always be discovered just by letting people speak. But not this time,
and that wasn't Emily. When you're just desperate to sneak off and
smoke, you don't tell authority figures to sit with you. I kept that
thought in, for now. "Hang on," I said to Sonia. "Let's split up. You go
check the ER and the parking lot. I'll head toward the other side of the
ground floor. Don't run." On task, Sonia, high ponytail describing
frenetic horizontal figure eights in the air, was gone. When she turned
the corner, I speedwalked to the escalator, trying to project
professional calm as I headed down to the ground floor. Ten seconds

to the cafeteria, twenty to the atrium. I turned right, one more hallway
to go. Counting steps. Listening for screams. The only sound a ticktock,
each step a small victory, each step burns calories. Each step is a win.
Nobody can stop you from taking more steps---and every step is closer to
death. I had been so close, but I had betrayed my undeserved gift, the
inescapable theme of my life, that people seem to unburden themselves
with me---and this time, someone needing help had started to connect,
and I had walked away. Why? Only because orthopedic surgery had paged me
once too often about a transfer that could wait. Here. Sharp edges
around this corner, at the sunlit cafeteria entrance. I allowed myself
to think: it was a beautiful day, as was every day here. Sunlight was
coming, but I was ready for that darkness, for that crow shadowbird. The
sun streamed in from the cafeteria patio as I turned right again, and
there she was, just an arm's length in front of me: Emily. We nearly
collided. She had been intercepted, hustling out of the cafeteria
entrance. Standing there, we locked eyes and then both looked down. She
let herself giggle in relief. In her hand was a plate of food, piled
high, nearly architecturally impossible. Fried chicken drumsticks, cake,
pizza---an edifice of pure caloric reward. She told me later it had been
her third round-trip in ten minutes. Duck into the cafeteria, stack
food, come back out through the entrance without paying---then to the
patio to gorge, purge, and return. A cycle of reward and release,
without consequence---yet hoping, needing, to be caught. Loopholing:
victory over the body and the equations of mass balance. That was
everything, and there was no stopping. But she felt it to be crazy, knew
it to be dangerous, and did not want to be alone.

• I was on call that night, and at the first quiet moment I went out
alone onto the roof, through the door near the call rooms where
residents could get a few minutes of sleep between admissions and
consults, and onto the moonlit expanse of concrete and railings and
vents. On rare quiet nights we would go out there together sometimes,
two or three of us, residents or

interns or students, and sit under the stars, leaning back against hard
metal scaffolds in our thin scrubs. The roof was uncomfortable but had
the feeling of a sanctuary---a space apart before the next burst of
calls and pages. That night it felt important to be still and alone, to
consider what had happened with Emily. Something about the biology of
this disordered eating felt hard and unallowable---and when that feeling
comes, I have found, it is best to seek a moment to sit with the
mystery. This disorder seemed to me unique, and important, and a clue to
something scientifically deep, but first I had to ask myself: how much
of this strong reaction I was feeling---that neuroscience needed to
learn much from this disease---was driven by my own parental sympathies,
a drive to care for Emily, displaced? I relived another scene: of a
father at his fourteen-year-old's bedside on the pediatric anorexia
unit, in his oil-changeshop shirt---Nick, it says above the left
pocket---after her heart attack and pneumothorax. The possibility of
death has been spoken, and is known to him. He's no longer able to look
at her; he is only just holding her, touch his only sense, seeing
nothing, focusing only on the frail sparrowlike form of her scapula, her
intermittent heartbeat felt faintly through to his chest, every two
seconds, and her weak cool breath on his shoulder. No---he is
remembering the sound of before she was born, the thumping whooshwhoosh
of her heart coming from the ultrasound like a war drum, filling the
room, fierce and strong and fast, she couldn't be held back, she was his
and coming, and the tears crashed out through his eyes, then and now.
She was, she had to be always, unstoppable. With the heels of my hands I
squeezed my eyes and blinked at the moon. Here was the essential
conflict I saw: the self was at war with its own needs. To understand
the biology of disordered eating, it seemed, we would have to understand
something even more fundamental, and no more accessible---the biological
basis of the self. And if the self could be separable from its needs,
what was the self then? What lay within and without its boundaries? An
ancient question, unsolved. We feel at home here---we are natives; we
are the self, we think---and yet we cannot precisely draw our borders,
nor name our capital. Not as human beings, not as neuroscientists, not
even today.

Some bounds can be guessed. The self does not extend outside the skin,
for example. But even that distinction is not as obvious as it seems.
Parenting may seem to blur that line. Nor does the self fill the whole
volume under the skin, nor even the whole brain. The self feels the
body's needs---but these needs are broadcast by some agent that is
other, yet still within the body. And pain or pleasure, doled out by
some deep and dour neural banker---our suffering when drives are
unfulfilled, our joy when drives are met---these seem only currencies
that motivate the self to act, but are no more self than any monetary
instrument: assets and debts, incentives. Philosophy, psychiatry,
psychology, law, religion: all have their own perspectives on the self.
Just imagination, without exception, though each fantasy nevertheless
describes truth of a sort. But neuroscience, with its power to know a
new kind of truth, and to make that truth known, has not quite weighed
in with an answer. Caution is needed---the right scientific words might
not even exist yet. Perhaps there is no such thing as a self, after all.
We do feel at times an especially strong sense of self---for example,
when we struggle with, and resist, and overcome a drive---but that sense
of self could be illusory, and the victorious entity just a shifting
alliance of other competing drives. Still, studying the process of
resisting primary drives (with eating disorders as extreme examples)
might be useful, since in late-stage anorexia, the entity that resists
food is not obviously a rival drive. There seemed to me no clear natural
process competing against the hunger ---no reason to resist that the
patients knew or understood or could express ---and yet hunger could
still be resisted. True, the resistance to food had started for a
reason, as a primal drive---social pressure, leading to a weightloss
goal---but that was only the trigger, starting the conscription of cells
and circuits into that vast new army, at the end with no more reason for
its final ravaging of the body than the fact of its own existence. And
yet in the magnitude of its blind destructive power perhaps deep biology
was revealed ---just as an earthquake exposes shattered strata that show
how the earth was made, in the very act of breaking the earth itself.
Biologists speak of genetic mutations that are "gain of function" or
"loss of function"---this means that a change has happened, a mutation,
that turns the function of the gene up or down. These mutations help
reveal what the gene is for. Knowing what happens with too much or too
little of something

reveals a great deal about that thing's role. For Micah's severe intake
restriction, despite all he had lost, I could start with thinking of
this behavior as a gain of function in the self, in whatever can resist
the natural drive to eat when hungry or to drink when thirsty (of course
with no implication that this self's distorted form is good for the
human being, any more than a gain-of-function mutation of a gene is
good, rather than destructive). But if one could eavesdrop on the
activity of neurons throughout the brain, one could listen for, and
localize, a circuit that stands out for resisting the impositions of the
drive, at least under some conditions ---and that could recruit allies,
other circuits, to help suppress drivesatisfying actions. Interesting
enough for a starting point, I thought---and with a tractability lending
itself well to exploration. But this starting point would be understood,
from the beginning, to be only a simplification, since the self includes
more abstract and complex representations of drive control than eating
or drinking---extending to all principles and priorities, roles and
values. And there was, I realized, a different dimension as well---also
within the self, and helping to define the self, but wholly separate
from priorities and primary drive adjudication. This separate dimension
of the self was its memories. Starting to feel the chill of night but
unwilling to leave the moonlit roof just yet---the night having a
perfection of its own, in a moment and a memory that might last---it
seemed to me that memories of what we have felt, and have done, might be
as important a part of the self, and just as fundamental, as priorities.
If an external force were to change my memories, I might feel even more
a loss of self than if my priorities were instead changed. When
answering which is the most important part of a self, it might matter
who is asking. On that rooftop, among the metal gantries and humming
vents, when I thought about almost everyone else in their
world---co-workers, leaders of society, strangers on the street---their
priorities seemed a more important aspect of their selves than their
memories. More important, actually, in that any change to those
principles would matter more to me. The selves of others were in a
different category, since for my own self, the opposite was true:
memories mattered more than priorities. Loved ones were perhaps in

between; my son's memories seemed as important as his priorities. A
little blurring of self-boundaries, perhaps. Relationships extend the
self into the world, through love. Why do our memories, of personal past
experiences, matter so much to our sense of self, with significance that
is at least comparable to our principles? Since we don't control our
memories, it is odd that we see them as essential to our selves---even
the experiences that are clearly external and brought upon us, like a
surprise kiss or a rogue wave. In considering this puzzle, out alone
under the just perceptible stars, a unifying answer began to emerge:
perhaps our sense of self comes not from priorities alone, nor from
memories alone, but from the two together defining our path through the
world. The self could even be seen as identical to this path---not a
path just through space, but through some higher-dimensional realm,
through three dimensions of space, one of time, and perhaps a final
dimension of value---that of worth or cost in the world, with valleys of
reward and ridges of pain. We are not defined by obstacles and
passageways that were laid down by others, by nature, and by the body's
inner drives. These details are not us. Other people, and storms, and
needs come and go, and as they do, they alter the hills and valleys of
the landscape---but the self chooses the route taken. Priorities pick
the path. Our selves are not the contour of that landscape available to
us, in this complex topography we travel---rather, they are the chosen
path. And memories serve to mark the path along the way, so we can find
ourselves, embodied as where we have passed. In this way I could see
self as the fusion of memories and principles, collapsed into the
unitary element of path. It wasn't clear how to make progress right away
with any of this, and I didn't get far that night before the pager, once
again, summoned me to the hospital below. Though I asked myself these
questions all the way through training, it took fifteen years from the
day I met Emily for neuroscience to respond to me, to say anything in
return at all. And when the words of science were spoken on this at
last, they were consummatory, spoken in the tongue of intake: of food
and water, of hunger and thirst.

•

Milton's fallen angel in Paradise Lost considered worldly losses as
trivial compared with the stability and surety of self, of a mind not to
be changed by place or time---even when freshly fallen into hell, a
setting known to eating disorder patients and their families. Most of us
are familiar with, and have used from time to time, this psychological
defense. Here at least we shall be free: suffering is tolerable if it is
the price of freedom. This perspective helps define the self in a useful
way, as that which will accept suffering rather than serve the tyranny
of needs and comforts. The self makes, and is, its own place in space
and time: defined not by need or circumstance, but by choosing a path
that resists need. What then are the brain cells and regions that might
have the capability, and agency, to pick such a path: to define a
trajectory through the world that resists intense need (without just
satisfying another drive)? Such circuitry would bring about a special
kind of freedom, and in some patients enable a special kind of hell.
Neuroscience has recently brought just a crack of light to this problem,
illuminating the line between need and self, edging open this door to
mystery. Hunger and thirst, two of the most powerful drivers of animal
action, begin in the brain as neural signals from small but potent
populations of neurons deep in the brain, cells mixed together in a
dense jumble with diverse roles that seem unrelated to one another, in
and around a structure called the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus lies
deep; the prefix hypo reflects its steadily progressing evolutionary
burial under eons of neural sediments---under the larger thalamus, which
itself is under the much larger striatum, which in turn lies under the
most recently laid-down cortex forming the densely woven neural fabric
on the surface of our brains. Some of the first optogenetic experiments
were carried out in these depths---in fact, the first optogenetic
control of free mammalian behavior was in the hypothalamus. In 2007 only
one kind of neuron here---the hypocretin cell population---was made
responsive to light delivered through a fiberoptic. Control of waking
and sleeping, and the REM of dreams, resulted; providing
millisecond-scale pulses of blue light, twenty times per second, to
these specific cells in this part of the hypothalamus caused sleeping
mice, even in REM sleep, to awaken earlier than they would have
otherwise.

This new precision had been needed, here as much as anywhere in the
brain---since the hypothalamus holds, within its seemingly chaotic mix,
not just neurons involved in sleep but also cells for sex, aggression,
and body temperature, as well as hunger and thirst, and virtually every
primal survival drive. All of these cells serve as broadcasters of
individual needs--- imposing (or trying to impose) their message on the
broader brain, on the self wherever it may lie, to drive action
addressing that need, working the levers of suffering and joy as needed
to reinforce that action. But all of these cells are intertwined with
one another in the hypothalamus, not separately accessible in real time
by scientists seeking to test for roles in behavior. Yet with
optogenetics, gain- or loss-of-function experiments were enabled, to
reveal how primal survival drives arise from specific activity patterns
in single kinds of cells---or even single cells. Neuroscientists could
control---provide or take away---the electrical activity of any one of
these diverse types of intermingled cells selectively, using the same
optogenetic principle that had illuminated anxiety, and motivation, and
social behavior, and sleep: in which genes from microorganisms cause
production of lightactivated electrical currents only in the cells of
interest. Optogenetics allowed testing which of these deeply buried
hypothalamic cells---known to be naturally active during the state of
need---in fact cause the hunger or thirst behaviors, actually driving
the consumption of food or water. Spots of laser light were delivered
into the brain by fiberoptics to turn on or off targeted cell types in
the hypothalamic region as animal actions were chosen in the world. With
the flick of a switch to drive optogenetic excitation, a food-sated
mouse immediately began to eat voraciously, and the opposite
experiment---an inhibitory optogenetic intervention---suppressed food
consumption even in a hungry mouse, underscoring the natural importance
of these cells. Similar experiments were carried out on different
hypothalamic cells: those for thirst. These experiments showed, in the
starkest of ways, how the choices of action made by an animal can be
determined by electrical activity in certain very specific, and very
few, neurons deep in the middle of the brain. The conundrum of agency
(does free will meaningfully exist or not?), while not answered, is
particularly well framed here. That a few

spikes of electrical activity in a few cells control choices and actions
of the individual---this now cannot be denied. Watching these effects in
real time in mice, a psychiatrist can become awash in personal
memories---heartrending clinical images of bulimia and anorexia, seeing
an individual gorging on food not needed, or suppressing food intake
desperately needed. The hunger and thirst optogenetics experiments
provided proof of principle that a local cluster of cells deep in the
brain could cause and suppress such symptoms---and so, perhaps, that we
might be able to design medicines or other treatments to target these
cells. But there was a key difference between experiments with
optogenetics and realities of the disease---a distinction important for
treatment, and for understanding the basic science of the self. In the
optogenetics experiments, we directly accessed---turning up or
down---the deep need cells that broadcast the drives of thirst or
hunger. But bulimia and anorexia patients, despite their extreme
thoughts and actions, still know the hunger---or at least the
emptiness---is there. What the patients may do is counteract the effects
of that feeling---associating positivity with the emptiness. If patients
can't get to the need cells in the hypothalamus directly---outside the
self's conscious control---this is how it must be done. Bring opposing
resources to bear, fighting the effects of those need cells, forming a
large enough and strong enough crowd in the town hall to win, to
outshout hunger. Is this how anorexia and bulimia become endowed with
personhood? Riding atop the self circuitry, while clearly separate---a
parasite, a virus recruiting the machinery of the host cell, a shell
running atop an operating system, an emulation of a self. Only in this
way can the disease access the problem-solving capability of the human
mind. The disease recruits all the brain that the self normally can
access, and must access---by turning hunger into a problem to be solved.
This simple subversion, initially endorsed by the patient---turning
hunger into a challenge---allows recruitment of what our brains seem so
well evolved for: solving problems, in a general and abstract way, to
address needs that could never have been anticipated by evolution. And
perhaps if we were not such versatile problem solvers, we would never
have developed the ability to suffer this class of disease. As I had
considered the day we lost---and found---Emily, different patients may
solve the problem

with different tricks---some by using circuits that are expert in
discrete repeated actions like the striatum (to bring in the OCD-like
pleasure of the rhythms of the count, and strike, and dig, and scratch,
and weave), perhaps others by using restraint drives located in the
frontal cortex (to bring in powerful executive-function circuits that
suppress feeding in the context of social cues). These are intriguing
possibilities, but not far-fetched; in 2019, optogenetics experiments
directly revealed groups of individual cells in the frontal cortex that
were naturally active during social interaction but not feeding---and
when directly activated by optogenetics, these specific social cells
could suppress feeding, driving a resistance, even in naturally hungry
mice. But regardless of specific provenance for one patient or another,
the militia called up are strong circuits, and expansive, even though
some have only emerged recently in evolutionary time, like those of the
neocortex--- that thin and vast sheet of cells including frontal cortex,
a problem solver partnering with the deeper and older striatum, its
enforcer and link to action. Rodents have much smaller brains than we
do, and relatively less neocortex, so mice may be less suited to resist
drives. But neocortex they do have, and in a separate stream of
optogenetics experiments from 2019, it was discovered that certain parts
of the neocortex can stand apart from even strongly driven primal
drives. When a mouse is fully water-sated but the deep thirst neurons
are optogenetically driven, intense water-seeking behavior results---and
yet a few parts of the brain are not fooled, and seem to know the animal
is not truly thirsty. These circuits listen to the drive, without buying
in; their local neural activity patterns are only mildly affected. This
result was one of several discoveries resulting from the kind of
brainwide listening experiment I had hoped for years earlier: using long
electrodes to listen in on tens of thousands of individual neurons
across the brain, while optogenetically stimulating the deep thirst
neurons. The first important finding from this brainwide eavesdropping,
and a big surprise, was that most of the brain---including those sectors
thought to be primarily sensory, or just movement related, or
neither---was actively engaged in the simple state of seeking water when
thirsty. Perhaps this finding revealed an important natural process by
which the brain keeps all parts of itself informed on all planned
movements and goals, so that even

simple actions would be experienced by every part of the brain as
generated from the self, and there would be no confusion as to the
source of the drive for action. This unitary quality can go awry in
disorders like schizophrenia, where simple actions can feel alien---as
if generated from outside the self. More than half of all the neurons
recorded across the brain showed engagement with the task of acquiring
water---both when the animal was truly needing water and also when, with
optogenetics, we created a thirstlike state. So now not only are those
old tales (usually thought to be false) claiming that only half, or even
10 percent, of our brains are used for this or that, demonstrably
wrong---but it also seems likely that almost the entire brain is
activated in specific patterns during every specific experience or
action (since we now know a task as simple as drinking water when
thirsty involves most of the neurons throughout much of the brain). The
second key finding was localization of the resistance: that
identification of brain regions refusing to be intimidated by the
imposed deep drive. Although clearly affected and so undeniably hearing
the thirst signal sent from below, those few cortical structures,
recently evolved and at the surface of the brain, stood out. These were
not fully responding, not matching the state they would have entered
into for an animal naturally seeking water when thirsty. The resistance
was revealed like a shadow thrown, across both the prefrontal cortex (a
region already known to be responsible for the generation of plans or
paths through the world, and locating oneself on those paths) and the
retrosplenial cortex (a region already known to be tightly linked to the
entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, two structures involved in navigation
and memory of paths in space and time). Both prefrontal and
retrosplenial cortex thus fit the idea of self as path, and were already
well known to be active during stimulusindependent thought---when a
human subject is asked to sit quietly and think of nothing in
particular, to simply be with one's self. This pattern contrasted with
that in neighboring cortical areas (insular cortex, anterior cingulate
cortex, and others), which showed neural activity patterns nearly
indistinguishable from when the mouse truly needed water, when thirst
was real. So it seems many brain areas are able to feel and encode the
state of natural thirst, as they should in order to help guide
appropriate action to keep the animal alive. But at least
two---prefrontal and retrosplenial cortex,

perhaps in their role of self- (or path-) creation and navigation---in
some sense know more about what the priorities of the animal should be,
in terms of where it has been and is going, separate from the deep
thirst drive. These two regions reside in recently evolved brain
regions---quintessentially mammalian, and massively expanded in our
lineage. It is on the backs of such resistance that the eating disorders
may find their strength---a standing army, quartered in neural barracks
but always restless and poised to be called up by disease. Like the
self-circuitry I imagined years earlier on the frigid metal gantries of
the moonlit rooftop--- thinking of, and recovering from, Emily---these
parts can come to war with the whole, and win.

• I walked Emily from the cafeteria to her room---she was relieved to
come back. We lined up staff members to sit with her, which required
some negotiation; there was no compelling legal authority against
bingeing and purging, though we had some leverage since she had been
stealing food. Sonia stayed with her first, Sonia who had been
transformed back to her old self, with all her strength and even her
serenity restored. And Emily at last could rest, cut off from access to
the actions of bulimia for the time being; she could begin to recover
and participate in developing a long-term plan for full healing. Even as
we worked to make sure Emily was not left alone, our social worker began
charting the path to an outpatient program. Bulimia had not dwelt long
in Emily, and we were hopeful when she was discharged two days later.
For Micah, who was in his forties with behavior that seemed so
entrenched, I was much less sanguine. We had already tried everything at
our disposal. We could continue to occasionally place the nasogastric
tube for feeding, when his blood pressure and heart rate skewed
dangerously low---but the legal basis for doing this was always shaky
and depended upon his inconsistent consent. He was not suicidal or
homicidal, which is all the law addresses in allowing compulsion of
psychiatry-based treatment---either these or grave disability, the
inability to provide for his own basic needs. But Micah could provide
perfectly well for his own needs; he only chose not to. Doctors can also
compel emergency care if the patient

is unable to understand the nature and consequences of treatment and
cannot make an informed decision---but here again, Micah understood
perfectly all the choices and consequences. He was not in delirium or
psychotic. He simply wished his body to take a certain unusual
form---with all the attendant risks. Here at least, he could be free. As
Micah continued to occasionally accept the NG tube---apparently only to
toy with me, removing it himself later at night---I wondered how I
seemed to him during all this. Hapless and childlike, arrogant and
threatening---or more likely, I was not even worth that much thought.
Micah's double disease set a course for him that was so strongly
overdetermined he could chart his own path up the steepest hills of pain
in that realm of space and time and value, and anything I said or did
was beneath notice, just a slight shift of gravel under his feet. He
refused a lastditch medication that we hoped could help organize his
thoughts, a low dose of olanzapine---which we also thought would put
some weight on him as a side effect. I rotated off the service a week
later, leaving Sonia to work with Micah. He was discharged to an
outpatient facility a few days later, no better for all our
ministrations.

• Sonia collapsed during a psychiatry team dinner at another resident's
apartment later that month. I hadn't seen her for three weeks. David, a
neurosurgery resident, partner to another psychiatrist there, was
standing next to her and leapt into action. Sonia had not quite lost
consciousness, but David did a quick check there on the carpet, and then
a fuller exam after we brought her to the couch and gave her orange
juice. We hung back and let him work her up, until he finally stepped
back, satisfied she had only fainted and was stable---and then, in a
surreal moment, apparently because I knew Sonia best, David came over to
present the case to me as if I were the attending rather than just
another resident like him. As worried as I was, and wanting to talk
quietly with her myself, I remember thinking in that dimly lit room what
an elegant thing his presentation was. David ticked through the history
he had acquired, summarizing the medical and neurological exam he had
tapped out in the miraculously intimate sonar of the physician without
instruments, the

pianist-like rhythmic fingertip percussing of internal air and water and
organs, of reflexes, of heart rate and blood pressure---and concluded
Sonia was severely dehydrated. She had been working out hard, admitting
to eight- or nine-mile runs every morning and eating little---just not
enough time, she had said. That day, there had been just carrots and
some coffee. Trying to peer around David, I did my best to see Sonia
through the gloom as she lay on the couch across the room. She looked
the same as when we had been on the team together, not thin or weak.
What had I missed, then, about Sonia the strong? Or perhaps instead, she
had only recently come to this way of being, in the past few weeks
having been joined by another, now sharing her journey. If anybody could
solve the equations of mass balance and create a path, a state in
defiance of a primary drive, it would be Sonia. She was her movement,
she was her path, and there can be no self without movement along the
path. Resist? One may as well. She had that part that moves, and fights
back, and for it goes to hell. OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 7

MORO The broken dike, the levee washed away, The good fields flooded and
the cattle drowned, Estranged and treacherous all the faithful ground,
And nothing left but floating disarray Of tree and home uprooted,---was
this the day Man dropped upon his shadow without a sound And died,
having labored well and having found His burden heavier than a quilt of
clay? No, no. I saw him when the sun had set In water, leaning on his
single oar Above his garden faintly glimmering yet... There bulked the
plough, here washed the updrifted weeds... And scull across his roof and
make for shore, With twisted face and pocket full of seeds. ---Edna
St. Vincent Millay, "Epitaph for the Race of Man"

"M

r.  Norman, he's on 4A. Eighty-year-old veteran, long history of
    multi-infarct dementia. Brought to emergency yesterday, by family."
    The medicine resident's voice over the phone was pressured---
    getting his work done, trying to check off this consult request as
    quickly as possible. "They report that he slowly stopped talking,
    progressing to total silence over the course of a couple months.
    That's the only new symptom." In my mind, that history was already
    concerning for neurological disease, raising the specter of a new
    stroke---especially with the apparent history of brain infarcts in
    the past---but it would be odd for a stroke-related process to
    evolve over months this way. I noticed in myself a mildly rewarding
    feeling of intrigue---a sensation I recalled from chess, when
    encountering an unconventional opening move. It was such a pleasant
    sensation, I even felt a bit guilty for feeling it. I leaned back in
    my chair and looked up at the grimy, flaking ceiling of the hospital
    sandwich shop. "Interesting," I began to reply, only to be cut off
    as the resident brusquely continued.

"The patient just moved here from Seattle after his wife died," he said.
"Been living with his son's family in Modesto for a few months now. The
family was worried about another stroke but we saw nothing new on the
scan last night---just old white-matter lesions. He did have a UTI, so
we're treating it, and we admitted him last night for that and to work
up whatever happened with his talking. And now, guess what?" A pause for
effect---despite the pace of his pressured speech, the resident could
not hide that he had found this one interesting too. Moments of
intellectual reward can be frustratingly short-lived on inpatient call
shifts, with little time to satisfy human curiosity; here, for what it
was worth, one such moment seemed to have come. "I got him to talk," the
resident continued. "Turns out he can when he wants to. Just a real
unpleasant character---he doesn't care about anyone, didn't care that
his family was worried. Extremely cold, actually. I think antisocial
personality. Guess even you guys can't unfuck that." Riffling sounds.
"Still in the process of getting his records from Seattle, but their
little clinic is closed till Monday. His son's here but doesn't know
much of the medical history; they weren't a close family. Not a big
surprise. My attending wanted me to call you, to see if you could
evaluate for psychiatric explanations, since we can't find anything
else. I don't really think it's delirium, since he seems oriented,
though you could still suggest a trial of haloperidol---his QTc is 520,
so let's be careful. Anyway, I think he just doesn't like people. This
should be quick." The resident had thought about side effects on heart
rhythms, and rightly so---if the interval between two peaks on the
electrocardiogram was already as long as 520 milliseconds, the treatment
team risked causing a serious heart arrythmia with certain medications
such as haloperidol---but his antisocial personality disorder idea
didn't sound right to me, and diagnoses I favored more began
volunteering themselves, populating my mental workspace. It was more
likely, I thought, to be a form of delirium that did not fit the
resident's expectations---a quiet subtype of the waxing-andwaning
disorientation often seen in the elderly, sometimes arising as a
medication side effect, or caused by a moderate illness like his urinary
tract infection. The medicine team might have assessed him by chance
during a lucid phase of the delirium cycle, and so found him to be
oriented.

The quiet ones are often missed; many doctors expect a highly active,
vocal, demonstrative state of delirium, but the presentation we call
hypoactive delirium is one of withdrawal, silence, and stillness on the
outside---while deep inside, a storm of confusion churns. On the other
hand, if the resident had been partly right---in the sense that there
was not delirium but rather a personality issue---then the personality
change that comes with dementia was more likely to be relevant here than
antisocial personality disorder. That empathy-deficient trait of
antisocial personality would have been part of a lifelong pattern---and
though unpleasant, would not have struck the family as unusual now. Also
favoring the dementia explanation, our brain imaging had apparently
confirmed the underlying process: blood flow blockages (lasting long
enough to kill cells) in vessels that supply the depths of the brain
with sugar and oxygen. These infarcts, spots of dead tissue that are the
outcome of strokes, can be detected by computed tomography even years
after the blockages, as scattered holes in the dense silkwork of
interconnecting fibers that link brain cells across long
distances---showing up on CT scans as lakelike black gaps called
lacunae. Even in patients without a known stroke, more sensitive
technologies like magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can show the small
vessel blockade of vascular dementia in a different way, as a profusion
of intense white spots---scattered across the brain, marking the end of
day with light, like stars in the early evening. Personality change in
dementia---well, common things are common. These changes appear in all
the dementia syndromes, along the way and especially toward the end,
when individual parts of the brain that manage predilections and values
begin to break down. I had seen Alzheimer's disease patients with newly
aggressive---even explosive---anger syndromes; Parkinson's disease
patients with sudden risk-seeking tendencies; and fronto-temporal
dementia patients with almost-infantile self-centeredness, verging on
antisocial behavior, that the resident might have sensed. In dementia,
memory loss is the most widely recognized symptom, but dementia does not
mean just amnesia. Rather more fundamentally, the word means loss of the
mind itself. Memories---the stored senses and feelings and knowledge
from along the journey of life that infuse the path with color and
meaning---are effaced along with the values that set the path's
boundaries and direction. And the latter---changing personalities and

upended value systems---can be as shocking as the memory loss: a
fundamental transformation in the identity, the essence of the self, of
the person known and depended upon for so long. This was, I thought, the
more plausible syndrome. But without seeing the patient I could not be
sure; there was also a chance the resident had actually nailed the full
diagnosis---perhaps a well-disguised antisocial personality disorder had
been unmasked by another process, like his urinary tract infection. I
began imagining the distinct chill of the antisocial, and reflexively
steeled myself to prepare for that slick indifference, that simulation
of social grace, that viperish gaze unwittingly revealing to me how
little I mattered, showing that one cannot conceal what one does not
understand. It was a quiet late-spring Saturday afternoon, the regular
weekday psychiatry consult team was off, and I was the on-call resident
for all things psychiatry. It was on me, so I stood up from my small
table in the cramped hospital café, donned my armor---starched white
coat, stethoscope, reflex hammer, pen---cleared away my coffee cup, and
headed to the fourth-floor medicine inpatient unit.

• Each major medical specialty in the hospital provides an on-call
consult service to help fellow physicians with complex cases. In
psychiatry this service is called the consult-liaison team, and training
in psychiatry involves a heavy dose of C-L, fielding calls across the
hospital---from intensive care and medicine units for managing delirium,
from the obstetrics floor for evaluating postpartum psychosis, from
surgery for sorting out competency and consent issues, and sometimes
just for patient transfer when a unit with a truly closed and lockable
door is needed. Highly interdisciplinary or mysterious cases,
pan-consulted, can bring the hospital together---in a kind of block
party of clinical care, with many services buzzing around. This had not
been obviously one of those cases--- with its seeming
simplicity---though when I pulled the chart from the rack at the nurses'
station, I discovered that several consult teams had already been called
before me---the neurology service most recently. I was the last

resort for Mr. N. (as the notes referred to him, in the veterans
hospital culture of anonymous respect). Among the possibilities not
mentioned by the resident, but discussed in chart notes left by the
various teams, were forms of parkinsonism; the speech therapy team had
correctly noted that Parkinson's disease can involve slow movements and
reduced vocalization. The neurology consult team, ultimate arbiters of
Parkinson's, had then come and gone, confirming poor short-term memory
and multi-infarct dementia---but they found no signs of Parkinson's,
noting as they signed off that although Mr. N. never smiled
spontaneously, he could move his facial muscles when requested; this was
not the frozen, masklike state of parkinsonism. Neurology had commented
also on the brain imaging confirmation of his multi-infarct dementia;
recent and distant strokes look very different with these scans, and
since no new stroke was apparent with CT, Mr. N.'s new reluctance to
speak needed some other explanation. So psychiatry was called
last---completing the usual progression through medical specialties,
ending in the realm of the unknown. I found Mr. N. in bed, looking
straight ahead, and oddly still. His bristly bald head was propped up on
three pillows, and his corrugated cheeks seemed to glisten slightly
under the fluorescent lights. I also thought this was not Parkinson's
after my own physical exam---there was no parkinsonian rigidity of the
limbs and no tremor. Nor did I see signs of catatonia, a rare syndrome
of immobility I needed to rule out, which can arise from psychosis or
depression; he could move all his muscles readily when asked, nerve by
nerve. Delirium could also be mostly excluded---with the unlikely caveat
that this might be, by chance, just another lucid moment. As the
medicine resident had said, Mr. N. could speak, and he spoke a few words
to me, choosing to answer only when asked repeatedly and the question
was simply factual---but this was enough to establish that he was mostly
oriented to time and place. Mr. N. knew he was in a hospital, he knew
who the president was, he even knew the state we were in. He knew his
son's name---Adam, from Modesto---the one who had taken him to the
hospital this time, the one who had brought two grandchildren into
Mr. N.'s life. Though he refused to answer questions on his internal
state---by remaining impassive, or with a brief head shake---one of his
refusals came

with a subtle feature that I could have easily missed had I not been
watching carefully. As part of the full mental status examination in
psychiatry, we probe participation in everyday interests and hobbies---
asking if these are being pursued and enjoyed. The question sounds
conversational, but reveals a great deal about motivation, and the
ability to feel pleasure. His response to this, my query if he was
enjoying his normal interests and activities in life, was
nonverbal---just a downward twitch of one corner of his mouth in a hint
of grimace---a half beat of self-disgust that seemed to me incompatible
with delirium or antisocial personality. I then had an urgent
responsibility, one neither the medicine resident nor I had anticipated.
Having caught a glimpse of his inner state, I now had to rule out
depression, perhaps with an accompanying paranoia (this can be caused by
severe depression and could explain his reticence to speak)---and I had
somehow to address this life-threatening possibility in a mostly
nonverbal patient, despite the fact that every diagnostic criterion in
psychiatry is ultimately verbal in nature. If Mr. N. were traveling
deeper into a storm of psychotic depression, more and more stoic on the
outside as he became increasingly paralyzed internally by hallucinations
and paranoia, this syndrome would be a disaster to miss---especially
since the condition would be elegantly treatable, with straightforward
medication strategies. Alternatively, even if there were no psychosis,
but only a severely depressed state suppressing effort allocation
---making it too much of a motivational challenge to articulate words,
to move lips and tongue and diaphragm enough to maintain a simple
conversation---this state would have to be ruled out as well. Such a
severe nonpsychotic depression could be fatal, but would also certainly
be treatable. I needed an approach that did not require the patient to
form words. Seeing a framed photograph at his bedside---a Modesto High
School basketball player, she seemed to be maybe fifteen---probably left
by his son, I asked Mr. N. to show me a picture of his granddaughter.
Displaying no grandfatherly excitement or pride, just shouldering the
burden of my request, he complied---but he had no interest in looking
himself. He just directed me with his eyes toward the evidence---and was
done. No hint of the disorganization of psychosis.

I picked up the photo and showed it to him, pointing to her, asking for
her name, watching closely. There was not a twitch of a smile, nor a
softening of the eyes; but his gaze was not as dry as it had seemed. Up
close I could track the almost imperceptible glistening of his cheeks; I
had thought it the faintest sheen of perspiration, but the hospital room
was chilly and now I could divine the source, track its scattered and
discontinuous path up through crevasses and forks to headwaters in the
corners of his eyes. He remained quiet, and could not say her name.
Silence crashed around us--- deafening, negative, noise.

• In major depressive disorder, loss of pleasure is a classical symptom,
and a classical-sounding name is given: anhedonia, the absence of beauty
and joy from life. As cleanly and completely as senses of taste and
smell are lost during the common cold, pleasure can be somehow detached
from experience. Though I had seen the anhedonia of depression---this
inability to find reward or motivation in natural joys---many times
before, it was unsettling every time. I could see how the resident had
been guided down the wrong diagnostic path. Such a symptom could have
appeared to manifest as a sort of inhumanity to physicians, friends and
family---with a seemingly reptilian lack of warmth, even for his own
grandchild. How many millions of people with depression, over the course
of human history, have had their isolation and suffering compounded this
way, by helplessly eliciting anger and frustration in
others---exacerbating all the other challenges and agonies of their
disease? Even with this perspective, I still had to work on my own
cognitions, to not react negatively to him as a person. Knowing is one
thing, but understanding is another. I knew but still didn't understand,
not deeply, neither as a human animal nor as a scientist. To understand
how pleasure can be detached from human experiences so universal and
fundamental, we might begin by asking how value is linked to experience
in the first place---where and why, in the human brain? And where and
why, in the story of humanity? The answers, if we could find them, might
explain the fragility of joy.

Sometimes the allocation of joy is automatic. We can feel powerful
innate rewards, which serve as natural reinforcers of behavior important
for survival and reproduction. One of these preset rewards may be
pleasure at interacting with a grandchild---an experience that seems
naturally positive in valence for us, though heightened further by
experience. This response (not universal among mammals) might have
acquired survival value in our lineage only as primates became more
long-lived and social, for its utility in encouraging protection and
education of the young. Those with increased ability to link reward
circuitry to representations of the extended family could have benefited
enormously from such an inborn wiring innovation. But all such
connections, as physical structures, are vulnerable like any other part
of the brain to a stroke---and depending on the exact location of the
infarct, the effect could appear to be either specific to one kind of
reward and motivation (causing an upheaval in priorities, and so an
apparent personality change) or a more general and pervasive loss of
pleasure in life (like the nonspecific anhedonia of depression). Other
innate pleasures seem to make little evolutionary sense---their
existence only underscoring our ignorance. The reward of seeing the wild
rough seashore---without the promise of food, water, or company---does
not explain itself well. It is not the joy of returning home, not as we
know it, not even in an evolutionary sense. Our fishlike forebears
learned to breathe at the brink of land and water, but not at the
pounding interface of cliff and wave. That part of our story is more in
the shallow swamps of 350 million years ago, when the first
air-breathing fishes emerged onto land. Why, then, do nearly all of us
see beauty in the seashore? Is there innate intrigue in the stark
contrast of cliff and crashing wave, the power and peril of momentum
versus bulwark? Or perhaps the waves in some way evoke the windsway of
an arboreal canopy, or the reliable repetition of a lullaby, soothing
with its rhythm and inevitability. Whatever its meaning, this joy is
real. It is widely shared, and runs deep, and yet no logic seems fully
explanatory. There are many such examples. Natural selection provides
one potential answer for the meaning of joy, which is that there is
none. Meaning is an elusive, even absurd quantity in evolution; there
was no meaning underlying the emergence of mammals to dominate the world
after the dinosaurs---it was just chance, a giant meteor strike
compounded by other natural disasters sixty-five million years ago

that killed off most life as ejected dust blocked out the sun. It was
meaningless, but consequential, how suddenly valuable it was to be
small, fast-breeding, warm-blooded, fur-covered---and to have a strong
innate drive to live in holes. Some feelings, and the resulting
behavioral drives, might arise from such chance associations, just
vagaries of the environment. If a small group of human ancestors had a
spontaneous affinity for---and crafted their lives around---the
seashore, then the unrelated bottleneck contraction of human populations
many tens of thousands of years ago could have created a founder effect:
a small set of survivors exerting a large effect on the subsequent
population. If most of those human beings who survived hung on via
mussels and tide pool debris, scraping along like limpets on wet rocks
as the rich plant life and large game animals on land died off,
surviving humanity might carry within a joy and an affinity for the
seashore, an intense appreciation for its imagined singular beauty---a
joy not caused by the population crash but simply allowed to persist and
propagate for the time being, due to humanity's close call with
extinction. Not to say we know anything like that happened---though from
paleogenetics we can see that there were indeed bottlenecks for us,
including that global collapse in human populations bottoming out only
fifty thousand years ago. Our most mysterious instinctual impressions of
loveliness, then, may be just accidental fingerprints---left by artists
of survival, on the cave wall of our genome. When we all do feel joy or
reward without learning, this is a trace of the past, cast forward over
millennia of experience in our lineage; our forebears, at some point,
most likely felt that joy, and those who were able to feel this way were
able to create us. But learned rewards are another matter, arising
within a lifetime, even within a minute. The brain seems designed to
ingest new information, and to swiftly alter itself in response--- this
is how memories are made, and behaviors learned or changed in the life
of an individual---and these fast physical changes can be studied in the
laboratory, providing a short-timescale model for what evolution might
work with on longer timescales. Learned behaviors can be rapidly tuned
by modulating the strength of connections in the brain, and the
groundwork for innate reward-seeking behaviors might be set over
millennia in a similar way---as evolved and genetically prescribed
connection strengths inside the

brain. Whether learned or innate, feelings may be attached (or detached)
from experience via the physical expedient of changing the strength of
certain connections across the brain. And so two distinct
concepts---feeling and memory---powerfully converge, both in health and
in their disordered states: anhedonia and dementia.

• We needed Mr. N.'s medical records to see if depression had been
detected before, if any hints of psychosis or catatonia had been
observed, and if any psychiatric treatments had been tried---with
success or failure or side effects. These data points could be essential
in finding a safe medication and avoiding harmful attempts at treatment
(an especially important consideration in geriatric psychiatry). The
Seattle clinic was closed until Monday, the resident had said, and it
was still only Saturday night. I needed that information before
suggesting a medication. The next step was for me to connect with the
primary treatment team and put together a plan---but it was getting
late; time for Mr. N. to sleep. For the moment he was stable and safe,
and so I took my leave, letting him know I'd come back to him tomorrow
with a plan. He did not respond. As I reached and opened the door,
already looking out into the hallway, I heard a voice behind me: "It's
going to be a long night." I froze at the door. Unprompted, a full
sentence had come forth---from this patient who had not spoken on his
own at all before, and with only one or two syllables at a time when
pressed. I turned and looked back across the room. He was now eerily
upright and looking straight at me. The glisten on his cheeks was more
intense, only on his upper cheeks, near the inner corners of his eyes.
The room dropped away. I saw him fully---his veiny, bald head rocking
gently with each breath, the symmetric sag of his eyes and mouth, his
steady gaze on me. He did not speak again. He had said something
important that he needed me to know. After a long pause, I gave him my
warmest smile and a reassuring nod. "Don't worry, Mr. Norman, we'll be
with you all the way through."

It's going to be a long night. The last sentence he would ever speak.

• The long course of dementia---whether spanning years or decades---is
almost certainly a new phenomenon of life on earth, willed into
existence by modern medicine and effective extended-family care. Via
supportive social structures built with our brains, we have made the
persistence of dementia possible, and have not yet found a solution.
There are no cures, and the few medications available only slightly slow
the steady progression of the disease. In psychiatry, dementia is today
(and this will change again) called major neurocognitive disorder, which
for diagnosis requires the conjunction of both a loss of independent
functioning and a loss of cognition (which can include nearly anything
related to memory, language, social/perceptual/motor function,
attention, planning, or decision-making). This long list, and the
diversity of the symptoms that are permitted for making the diagnosis,
in turn allow dementia---or major neurocognitive disorder as a medical
construct---to encompass all the small and large disruptions in brain
communication that can occur over a lifetime: by lacunae from strokes,
by plaques and tangles in Alzheimer's disease, by spots of focal damage
from accumulated injuries. Disconnection, miscommunication, lost
pathways. But what is actually missing? Although brain cells certainly
die in the dementias, it is not known if memory loss is always due to
something like the loss of cells or synapses responsible for holding the
memories---akin to wiping a computer drive. It is possible that instead,
for at least some stages of white-matter damage like multi-infarct
dementia, memories remain intact---but lie isolated from input or output
projections, with only their connectivity lost. With only interrupted
input---access to the memory lost, just the pointer or lookup
information---the memory would be present but not reactivatable. Or
perhaps only interrupted output could occur: memories might be
reactivated perfectly well, but find themselves unable to reach back
into the conscious mind. Slumbering in the snow, or screaming into the
void---either way, a memory could still live intact but in isolation,
with connectivity lost

due to the dark lakelets, the lacunae, the focal infarcts severing
long-range fibers spanning the brain. Clinically, a substantial fraction
of multi-infarct dementia patients also exhibit anhedonia---a surprising
correlation for two seemingly unrelated syndromes. Studies have found
considerably increased anhedonia in senior populations with cognitive
impairment, versus cognitively intact comparison groups---even manyfold
increased in patients with frank dementia. This connection between
feeling and memory runs yet deeper; in these populations, the greater
the accumulated volume of those lacunae in white matter---showing
greater loss of long-range connections, the carriers and controllers of
information---the more anhedonia was seen. When memory fails, feeling
can follow. Optogenetics experiments have shown that value, or valence
as we say, can be attached to brain states by long-range connections
across the brain--- for example, that valence of release from anxiety is
set in part by projections from the BNST to reward circuitry deep in the
midbrain. And these intriguing human epidemiological linkages---the
association between anhedonia and dementia, and the association in
dementia between lacunar volume and anhedonia---could be explained if
the same process that causes the decline in memory (damage to long-range
white-matter tracts, inputs and outputs) also causes the decline in
feeling. Cells that could provide feelings may still be present but cut
off, in the same ways that memories may be lost: by becoming voiceless.
Memory also needs feeling, in some sense. There may be little
justification to store and recall a memory of an experience, unless the
experience matters enough to elicit a feeling. Information storage takes
space, uses energy, and creates curational challenges; no such cost can
be borne for long on evolutionary timescales without manifesting some
benefit. So the very act of storing and recalling information, of making
and using a memory, is often entangled with the fact that the experience
matters ---which in conscious beings like us often means association
with a feeling. Thus anhedonia could not only arise from the same
process underlying dementia, but also impair memory itself, further
increasing the correlation of these two states. Many neuroscientists
today believe that remembering involves a reactivation of some of the
very same neurons that were active during the

initial experience. Several investigators have used optogenetics to
explore this idea, not in sensory regions of the brain but instead in
memory-related structures called the hippocampus and the amygdala, by
tagging cells that were strongly active during a learning experience
(such as a fearful episode in a particular context), and then
reactivating a subset of those tagged cells with light, much later, far
from the fearful context across both space and time. Mice can be seen
exhibiting fear in these cases, even in the absence of anything related
to the initial fear-inducing experience---that is, absent everything but
the optogenetic reactivation of a few of the fear-memory neurons. So
remembering, it seems, can happen when the right combination of brain
cells---called an ensemble---speaks together. If this is remembering,
then what is the memory itself when it is not being actively remembered?
Within which molecules, cells, or projections do the bits reside? Where
is the actual information of a memory---of the stored experience, or
knowledge, or feeling---as it lies dormant, awaiting recall? Many in the
field today think an answer to this question lies in a quantity called
synaptic strength---a measure of how strongly a neuron can influence
another neuron, defined as the gain from broadcaster to receiver. The
stronger a synapse, or functional connection, between two cells, the
greater the response in the receiving cell will be to a fixed pulse of
activity in the broadcasting cell. As abstract as it seems, this change
in influence at the synapses could be the memory, in a real and physical
sense. There are many interesting features to synaptic strength that
make this idea plausible. First, theoretical neuroscientists have proven
that synaptic strength changes indeed can store memories in an automatic
way during experiences (without requiring intelligent supervision) and
in a form that allows easy recall. Second, synaptic strength changes of
the right kind can happen in the real world---in fact, very readily and
swiftly in living neurons and brains---in response to bursts of activity
or neurotransmitters. Certain patterns of synchronous or high-frequency
activity pulses can drive increases---potentiation---in synaptic
strength, while asynchronous or lowfrequency pulses can drive
decreases---depression---in synaptic strength. Both effects are
plausibly useful for memory storage, based on the theoretical work.

It had only been a tantalizing hypothesis, that synaptic strength along
a path from one part of the mammalian brain to another could be
specifically and directly adjusted to change behavior. This idea had not
been formally testable without a way to selectively provide activity
pulses to change synaptic strength in projections defined by origin and
target in the mammalian brain. But optogenetics enabled this
intervention: a connection from one part of the brain to another can be
made light-sensitive, and then high- or low-frequency light pulses can
be provided along these pathways. By 2014 several groups working with
mammals were optogenetically applying these principles from memory, and
had confirmed that powerful and selective effects on behavior can be
exerted by projection-specific synaptic strength changes themselves.
Projections fundamentally embody how effectively different parts of the
brain can engage with each other, whether in health or disease; for
example, it is known that interregional connectivity strength predicts
interregional activity correlations. It is also known that interregional
activity correlations can be linked to specific states of
enjoyment---for example, reduced coordination between the auditory
cortex and a deep reward-related structure (the nucleus accumbens)
predicts anhedonia for music in human beings. Likewise, the specific
basic reward of caring for a grandchild could be enabled by a capability
for strong synaptic connectivity (and thus effective engagement) between
one brain region responsible for addressing drives or rewards (like the
hypothalamus or VTA/nucleus accumbens circuitry) and another brain
region representing hierarchies of kinship relationships (like the
lateral septum). Projection-specific synaptic strengths may allow such
specific behaviors to become favored and rewarding, especially with
learned positive experience. In this way, synaptic strength at the level
of brain region interconnection is an interesting quantity relevant to
development and evolution of our internal feelings, since evolution is
well suited to working with such interregional connection strengths.
Though evolution knows nothing of music or grandchildren per se, it
could set up the conditions allowing either or both to be enjoyed---to a
certain level, with the right life experience. And there is no shortage
of genetic complexity available to lay these specific foundations, in
the richness of gene expression patterns that determine how cellular
diversity and axon guidance implement brain wiring.

Value---whether negative for aversion, or positive for reward---in the
end is only a neural label of sorts, one that can be attached to, or
detached from, elements like experiences or memories. This flexibility
is crucial for learning, for development, and for evolution. But what
can be readily attached may be just as easily detached---for good or
ill, in health or disease ---and we now have a path for understanding
how this flexibility can be enabled. Memories and values alike may both
reside in synaptic strengths, learned or evolved as physical structures.
And the path to the synapse--- along the axon, the long-range fiber
emerging from one cell to touch other cells---is set up and directed and
grown according to instructions from genes (which follow all of
evolution's rules) at which point the synapse itself can be powerfully
tuned by the specificity of experience. Our paths, our joys, our values
all lie along thin threads that can be cut---connections bearing our
memories, projections that are our selves.

• I signed out to the night psychiatry resident, whose Saturday swing
shift was sandwiched between my two daytime Saturday and Sunday shifts.
I had not met him before; he looked excessively sporty and energetic.
Tired but thinking myself tolerant, I walked him through a summary of
the patients on our unit with active issues before driving home to get a
few hours of rest. Driving back to the hospital again the following
morning, along the deserted streets of early Sunday in Palo Alto, my
thoughts drifted back to Mr. N. There remained challenging logistical
issues if we were to initiate administration of a medication. We had to
determine who was legally able to provide consent, and if Mr. N. was not
able, the primary team needed to have a discussion with his
son---someone I had not yet met. There was little I could do in the
moment; I was technically only a consultant on this case, not a
decision-maker. After getting sign-out from the now-haggard night
resident for the patients on our psychiatry unit and managing to listen
with benign interest as he troweled on thickly the stories of his
overnight valor, I went to a workstation to see if anything new had
appeared regarding Mr. N. His location had changed, surprisingly---his
name no longer appeared on the 4A

medicine unit roster. A moment later I saw he was in the ICU---the
intensive care unit. Mr. N. had suffered a massive stroke the night
before, an hour after I had left him. His body was alive, but it was
unlikely he would ever recover independent living. His son had power of
attorney. Code status had been set: do not resuscitate; do not intubate.
I stood dumb, staring, impotent. He had been right and needed to tell
me. His night would be very long.

• Only at the very end of life---only when we have put away the
chessboard, with all moves made, with no more surprises to come, with
most consequences played out---can we fairly judge ourselves and assign
credit to actions that ultimately brought success or failure. But it is
also here at the end where the memories of our moves fall away,
forgotten---a cruel twist, for without memory, how then can we make
sense of the lives we have lived, and find meaning in the paths we took,
amid the pathos? We cannot, and so we end where we begin, helpless and
uncertain. Mr. N. surprised us by living on for several weeks before
passing. I saw a man whom I presumed to be his son two or three times
around the hospice unit, walking in and out---and once as he was pushing
Mr. N., supine on his gurney, down the corridor. I remember that day
pausing to watch them, as they eased toward a patch of sunlight by a
window, and I remember hearing his son's gentle whisper: Here's some sun
for you, Daddy. Mr. N. looked older than I remembered---lying flat,
utterly limp, his skin a paler gray, eyes closed and mouth open, atonal,
utterly still. Cashed out and gone home. His bristly head, the only part
of him not covered with the blanket and sheet, seemed proud and
dignified to me, though. It evoked the memory of his final move, sitting
up in his hospital bed, telling me something that mattered through the
fog of dementia and depth of depression, with nearly everything already
taken away from him. As they neared the window and its broad sunbeam, I
could hear a medicine team hustling our way, chattering about atrial
flutter. Mr. N.'s son could hear them too---he pushed a little faster to
make space, clumsily guiding the gurney toward the window at the
corridor's edge.

As the team swept past me, humming along in a crescendo of discussion,
the gurney jolted gently to a halt as its bumpered corner tapped the
wall. At that moment of impact, both of Mr. N.'s arms suddenly swept up
toward the ceiling, askew but together---the sheet dropping away as one
arm ended firmly skyward, the other weaker, halfway up, both hands open
and fingers splayed. Stable and strong. A frantic reach, a shocking
strength. A stunned moment of silence seized the hallway, and its motley
collection of spectators, as Mr. N.'s son and the interns and I looked
on at the reaching, grasping arms, all of us locked together in the
surreal scene for a beat or two---and then the arms eased back to the
gurney, together. Mr. N. was once again at rest. The medicine team had
slowed but never stopped. It took a few seconds for their chatter to
build and re-form, as they turned a corner at the end of the hall, but
now humming in a minor key, the neurology of reflexes surfacing in their
minds from a whirlpool of memories and desires.

• In dementia, the infantile reflexes come back, movements choreographed
by evolution for the survival of primate babies: the Moro reflex (arms
sweep up when the body is suddenly dropped or accelerated, a relic from
our tree-climbing forebears, saving infant lives of those who became our
ancestors) and the root (light touch on the cheek triggering a turn of
the head and an opening of the mouth, to find milk). Falling from
height, and losing contact with mother---the basic unlearned fears of
human newborns. Both action patterns disappear after a few months of
life but come back with dementia or brain damage---not re-created at the
end of life, but rather never really gone, always present but latent for
decades, layered over with higher function, coated with inhibition and
cognitive control, with all the threads of lived life. As the fabric
frays and texture is lost, the original self finds voice again in a
heart-wrenching grasp for safety, reaching for a longdead mother. All
the details of life that mattered so much over the years, that brought
moments of happiness or pain, had only covered her over, weaving across
with so many weft threads that she could no longer be seen. But always
there, and now at the end, the framework for everything surfaces again.
As

the fine threads fall away, she becomes, once more, the whole world. She
might be reachable again, the mammal who kindled her baby to life, who
shakingly held, and nursed, and shielded her child---from the rain and
sun. As the threads of the mind disintegrate, as massive insulated
fibers fragment and fray, when memory and agency have dissolved away,
what was there since birth is all that is left...a human infant in a
thin cloth of gray, now exposed again to the cold. Now all there is, in
the confused darkness, is a gentle sway....And when balance suddenly
shifts, as the dry weak branch snaps, the baby is released into the
night, unpinned from the world, and falls---hands sweeping, in a
desperate grasp. A branch breaks, and this is all at the end. A
tree-dwelling baby, a grasping for mother, a falling through space.
OceanofPDF.com

EPILOGUE My great blue bedroom, the air so quiet, scarce a cloud. In
peace and silence. I could have stayed up there for always only. It's
something fails us. First we feel. Then we fall. And let her rain now if
she likes. Gently or strongly as she likes. Anyway let her rain for my
time is come.... So. Avelaval. My leaves have drifted from me. All. But
one clings still. I'll bear it on me. ---James Joyce, Finnegans Wake

T

he shuttle swings on, ticking back and forth at the leading edge of the
tapestry, marking time in space like a pendulum, embedding moments and
feelings. Warp threads point the way into unformed space, framing--- but
not determining---what happens next. This steady progression of
experience clarifies patterns and buries structural threads. Either
outcome serves as a resolution of sorts. My oldest son, with whom I
lived as a single father for many of these experiences---and whose
broken home frightened me in the context of what I was seeing
clinically---has now grown into a hardworking computer scientist and
medical student, with caring relationships and a talent for guitar.
Intersecting threads can either interrupt, or create, a pattern---and
life gives no explanation. I now have four lovely younger children with
an eminent physician-scientist---also at my university---whose mission
is studying, and treating, the very same brainstem tumor that had grown
in the little girl with eyes misaligned, who had almost brought to an
end my path in medicine. At the heart of every story here, there is a
lost child---but one who might still be found. Every sensation described
here, each individual feeling and thought that guided me to this point,
now seems more richly textured than when first experienced, and more
deeply interwoven. But is the original feeling better defined by, or
instead obscured by, these connections formed with time? In some ways it
doesn't matter---any more than buried warp threads can be meaningfully
revealed without destroying a tapestry, any more than we can

expose and experience our original feelings again without cutting
connections and memories, and losing ourselves. Ongoing scientific
developments will continue to provide more textured interpretations for
the stories told here. With each new discovery, our own construction by
evolution becomes ever less simply described, and even the extinction of
Neanderthals acquires more dimensionality as paleogenetics progresses.
Of course they live on in us, and so are not extinct in any definitive
sense, but an even more profound truth has now become apparent. We now
know that when the last Neanderthals died, they were already part modern
human---because the intermingling went both ways, and the last
Neanderthal may have been also the last survivor of a wave of modern
humans that had left Africa first. Their extinction is truly human, our
own. Most of the medical discoveries described here will, over time, be
identified as just elements of a much larger picture---and those will be
the success stories. A few will be forgotten, or found flawed enough to
require patching and replacement. But this process of discovery and
repair of flaws in our understanding is identical with the progress of
science. Gaps and flaws by their very nature---like the disease
processes themselves--- illuminate and reveal. Light in the natural
world passes only through gaps already present--- like cracks in the
cloud cover or passages through the forest canopy blown open. But with
this biology, and in these stories, visible light inverts that paradigm
by physically opening a gate---information creating a path for itself,
illuminating the whole human family as it streams through. Sometimes it
seems the channel is only clumsily stuck open, a rural cow gate in damp
sod; we have not fully prepared the pathway, or ourselves, to deal with
the information coming through. But the gate is open. Recent years have
even brought insight into the gate itself. Hearkening back to feelings
experienced near the very beginning of my scientific journey---crossing
scales, exploring mysteries of the whole brain while grounded all the
way down at the cellular level in our scientific methods--- we have also
now delved even deeper, to the molecular and atomic levels of
resolution, in exploring how the light-gated protein called
channelrhodopsin actually works. We have been able to elucidate the
mystery of how light can be detected by a molecule and then turned into
electrical current flowing

through a pore in that same individual molecule. These experiments use
intense beams of X-rays---the same kind of scientific method,
crystallography, that enabled the discovery of the double-helical
structure of DNA. There had been intense controversy: some prominent
investigators had claimed that there was not a light-gated pore within
the channelrhodopsin molecule. But X-ray crystallography allowed us not
only to see the pore directly and prove its existence, but also to use
that knowledge to redesign the pore and show the depth of our
understanding in many ways: changing atoms around---reupholstering the
pore's inner lining---to create channelrhodopsins that conduct
negatively charged instead of positively charged ions, or to make these
molecules responsive to red rather than just blue light, or to change
the timescale of the electricity elicited, speeding or slowing the
currents manyfold. These new channelrhodopsins have already proven
useful for neuroscience across a broad range of applications, and so
cracking the structural code of this mysterious light-gated
channel---thereby solving a fundamental mystery rooted in the basic
biology of a most amazing plant---also opened up a scientific pathway to
new explorations of the natural world, and of ourselves. Today, even as
science in my own lab at Stanford progresses, I still treat patients in
an outpatient clinic focusing on depression and autism (and serve as
attending physician for a block of inpatient call time every year)---all
the while working with a new generation of psychiatry residents,
teaching and learning as we journey together through a field that still
feels as enthralling and mysterious as it did in my first moment with
the schizoaffective disorder patient. We achieve cures in many patients,
and in others we can only manage symptoms---a path followed in many
fields of medicine, where we manage intractable diseases because we can,
and because if we don't, the patient dies. We are honest peddlers of
herbs that help---of feverweed and foxglove. As our understanding of
psychiatry and our insight into the neural circuit control of behavior
progress together, we might be wise to begin awkward conversations for
which we feel unready. We will need to stay philosophically, and
morally, ahead---rather than trying to catch up once it is too late. An
uncertain world is already demanding from psychiatry answers to
difficult questions about ourselves in health, not only in disease.

The reasons for this pressure are important---to discover, and then
grapple with, and then embrace, humanity's uplifting and disturbing
contradictions. And so here, in the form of epilogue, we can look
briefly to the future, along three dark and deeply forested paths only
dimly illuminated by the stories in this volume that each need more
profound exploration soon: our process of science, our struggle with
violence, and the understanding of our own awareness.

• Scientific breakthroughs are difficult to predict or to
control---forming an odd contrast with much of the process of science,
which is an exercise in controlled, and ordered, thought. Indeed,
ordered thought seems natural to the human mind in general, and control
over the flow of complex thoughts is taken for granted, just as we
assume the steady forward passage of time. And yet we cannot use our
appetite for order and control to plan the process of science
completely. This is a major lesson from most scientific breakthroughs,
including that of optogenetics---revealing the need to support basic
research that at some level is unplanned. It would have been impossible
to predict the impact---on neuroscience---of research into microbial
light responses over the past 150 years. Similarly unexpected
developments have launched many scientific fields; indeed, because this
volume is partly memoir the stories focus on optogenetics, but other
pioneering fields have also converged from unexpected directions to
define the landscape of biology today. Thus optogenetics has revealed
not only a great deal about the brain but also, in an accessible way,
the nature of the basic scientific process. This idea is important to
keep at the forefront of our minds as we move together into the future:
scientific truth---a force that can rescue us from weaknesses of our own
construction---arises from free expression and pure discovery. That, and
perhaps also from a little bit of disordered thinking. I recall an
alcoholic cirrhosis patient, in my care but without prospect of a new
liver, who is reaching his endgame. He is drowning on dry land in liquid
of his own creation. His belly is turgid and tense with ascites---the
brownish-yellow fluid of hepatic failure, perhaps ten liters or more,
distending his abdomen, compressing his lungs and diaphragm from below.

He is only forty-eight but struggling to breathe, gasping in the bed
before me. I hold a crude tool, a trocar. Medieval, heavy in my hands,
it is all we have. Illuminated by the harsh, bright procedure light at
the bedside, the trocar is still dull as pewter---sterile but stained,
tarnished, a blunt cylinder for placing a drain in the abdominal wall. I
can take off five or six liters of fluid from his abdomen at a time, but
this buys him space to breathe for only two or three days before the
steady accumulation of ascites fills him up again. I cannot cure the
illness, but I can do something, steadily and carefully, until we know
more. Truth is our trocar, for now. Truth that we can get to, as soon as
we can get to it, through the open conversations that we know, of free
argument and creative discovery. Science, like songs and stories, serves
as such a free form of human communication. Science also differs in that
the conversation seems at first limited to the fraction of human beings
trained to appreciate its full meaning. But like the performance artist
Joan Jonas said about her art in 2018, science is "a conversation with
the past and the future, and with a public." Scientists are not recluses
shouting data into the void, nor automatons filling drives with bits. We
seek truth, but truth to communicate in ways that we think and hope may
matter. The meaning in our work comes from human partners we imagine and
direct our voice toward, with awareness that these conversations will
not be one-way. Even completing a major breakthrough requires
understanding of how it will be communicated, which in turn requires
consideration of the listeners as well as the speaker, and the volatile
context---the dynamic frame of the world beyond, its time and place in
the human story. In unformed open spaces that bring no judgment or
posturing, our path forward is that of a patient in talk therapy, where
insight is achieved only through engaging freely and frankly, and
without possibility of penalty. Otherwise immature defenses are the
resort; walls are erected, evincing no understanding, isolating our own
feelings---walls built because honest and free conversation, engaging
all human family members, has not been prioritized. We need to be what
we might be, so we can discover who we are.

•

Not far beneath the surface, part of what we can be is violent toward
one another. There are many---too many---paths that lead to violence,
with societal complexity that is important to understand, and this is
perhaps the subject of another, different text. But when violence is
visited upon human beings by human beings, without an obvious reason,
seemingly for its own sake, then psychiatry (and thus neuroscience)
would seem as close to the front lines as any school of human thought.
This situation is usually framed in psychiatry as antisocial personality
disorder, which is largely overlapping in meaning with sociopathy, a
term widely used in the general public. We have no answers to the
natural human questions---why does this disorder exist, and what can be
done?---while it seems the need to understand this condition grows more
urgent every day. What proportion of humanity is capable of causing
pain, or death, with utter disregard for human feeling? Estimates vary
enormously depending on the study or population, from 1 to 7 percent,
likely due to matters of degree ---and variance in opportunity, which
may be all that separates the active cases from those in a latent state.
In psychiatry, the definition of antisocial personality disorder
includes "a long-term pattern of disregard for, or violation of, the
rights of others," and so the criteria can be met in a person with both
cruelty to animals as a child and disregard for physical or
psychological integrity of other human beings as an adult. Both bits of
history can be concealed, but both often are uncovered with surprising
ease in the psychiatric interview, and the trained psychiatrist can come
to a tentative diagnosis quite quickly. What do we do with 1 to 7
percent: this high number, and this broad range? Are we good at heart,
or original sinners? Either way, a strong argument makes itself for
setting up societies so that no one person is ever fully trusted or
empowered---with checks at all levels: personal, institutional, and
governmental. But at even a few percent, this means the condition is
deeply baked into the population. This seems a heavy burden for our
species, explaining a great deal about human history and the present
day---but one hopes, less so about the future, for how else can one
imagine a future for humanity?---as the consequences of our actions
become more global and more permanent. Astrophysicists ask a related
question in thinking about the cosmos: with its innumerable planets and
its billions of years, if total technological

transformation of a species and of a world takes only a few hundred
years as we know, just a moment, an eyeblink, why does the universe seem
so quiet? An easy explanation is that extinction follows very quickly
from technology. No amount of institutional restraint is ever
enough---the drives that support survival, in the end also drive
extinction. Evolution creates intelligence that is unsuited for the
world that intelligence, in turn, creates. Can deeper scientific
understanding of the biology save us? Little is known about the biology
of antisocial personality. There is a heritable component (accounting
for as much as 50 percent) revealed by studies of twins, and some
evidence for reduced volume of cells in the prefrontal cortex, where
aspects of restraint and sociability operate. Specific genes have been
linked to sociopathy or aggression, including those encoding proteins
that process neurotransmitters like serotonin in the synapse---and
altered brain activity patterns have been observed, including changes in
coordination between the prefrontal cortex and reward-related structures
like the nucleus accumbens. But we lack deep understanding or clearly
identified paths of action. Contradictions in the field still
abound---for example, disagreement as to whether impulsive violence or
its polar opposite (calculating, manipulative violence) is the more
relevant core symptom. Each concept points to opposing ideas for
diagnosis and treatment. Modern neuroscience, however, has begun to
illuminate the circuits underlying violence directed to another member
of the same species---in studies that (while revealing) verge on the
deeply disturbing. In a striking example of such a discovery that could
not have been accomplished with prior methods, one group of researchers
tried in rodents to test electrical stimulation of a tiny sliver of
mammalian brain thought to modulate aggression---the ventrolateral
subdivision of the ventromedial hypothalamus, or VMHvl. The research
team was unable to observe aggressive responses despite numerous
attempts at stimulating with an electrode, likely because the VMHvl is a
small structure that is closely surrounded by other structures that
elicit defensive measures instead, such as freezing or fleeing; these
surrounding structures or their fibers would also be activated by
electrical stimulation of the VMHvl, confounding and confusing the
behavioral results. But when the team next made use of the precision of
optogenetics to target only VMHvl cells with an excitatory

microbial opsin, stimulation of these cells with light elicited a frenzy
of violent aggression toward another mouse in the cage (a smaller
nonthreatening member of the same species, the same strain, that the
optogenetically controlled mouse had been perfectly content to leave
alone, until the moment of flipping on the laser light). The fact that
individuals can be so instantaneously and powerfully altered in their
expression of violence points to deep questions of moral philosophy. In
teaching optogenetics to undergraduates, I have found it striking to see
the responses they exhibit upon seeing videos---peerreviewed and
published in major journals---of instantaneous optogenetic control of
violent aggression in mice. Afterward, the students often need a period
of discussion, almost a dose of therapy, simply to process and
incorporate into their worldviews what has been observed. What does it
mean about us, that violent aggression can be so specifically and
powerfully induced by turning on a few cells deep in the brain? As the
professor I can transmit the perspective that this is not entirely a new
effect---aggression has previously been modulated to varying degrees,
over decades, with genetic, pharmacological, surgical, and electrical
means. But such knowledge seems to be of little value to the students in
the moment. With these prior interventions, there has always been a
veneer of nonspecificity and side effects. In contrast, the more precise
an optogenetic intervention becomes, in the context of a seeming lack of
self-limitation, the more problematic are its implications, and the
better posed certain conundrums seem to be. And what exactly are those
conundrums? Optogenetics is too complex to be a weapon; rather, the
issue is what the animals seem to be telling us about ourselves: the
change in violent behavior, in its power and speed and specificity,
seems disconnected from, or unconnectable to, ways we seek to combat
violence in our civilization---that is, these powerful neural circuit
processes seem destined to ultimately overpower fragile societal
structures set up to prevent moral detachment. What can be done? What
hope is there? What are we, really, when murderous violence can be
instantly induced by only a few electrical blips in a few cells? But
violence can be suppressed by a few spikes too, and so at least there is
now a path forward: using optogenetics and related methods to elucidate
the cells and circuits that suppress aggression. And even if not
immediately

practical or therapeutic, this neuroscience-based dimension of insight
enables us to move beyond intense societal debates of the past (while
building on what has come before). We can now begin to unify the
intersecting influences of genes and culture in a concrete and causal
framework. We now understand enough about behavioral causation to see
how elements of neurophysiology underlying behaviors as complex as
violent aggression can be manifested in well-defined physical components
of the brain: projections endowed with form (direction and strength) by
individual brain development on the one hand, and learned life
experience on the other. Because we do not fully control either our
brain development or our life experience, the precise nature of personal
responsibility for action is still an interesting and contentious
matter. A modern neuroscience perspective informed by the kind of work
described in this volume might hold that there is no personal
responsibility for some actions that involve the brain (like startle
responses) because circuitry involving the self was never consulted, in
contrast to other kinds of action where priorities and memories weigh in
---that is, where circuits are engaged that define one's path through
the world, such as the retrosplenial cortex and prefrontal cortex. Since
such a sentence, describing causal and measurable concepts, can be
reasonably written without using words like consciousness or free will,
which are difficult to quantify, modern neuroscience may indeed be able
to make headway on these hard questions, that until now have inhabited
only the fascinating domain of the philosophical treatise. There is
unlikely to be a single location in the brain that explains freely
chosen actions; indeed, we are increasingly able to grapple with more
widely distributed circuitry for decision-making and path-selection, as
we attain ever-broader perspectives on the activity of cells and
projections throughout the brain during behavior. In 2020, recording the
activity of cells broadly across mouse and human brains brought insight
into the circuitlevel construction of the self, by probing the
fascinating process of dissociation---in which the inner sense of one's
self is separated from physical experience, and so individuals feel
dissociated from their own bodies. The self is aware of but detached
from sensations---no longer feeling ownership of, or responsibility for,
the body. With optogenetics and other methods, activity patterns in the
retrosplenial cortex (consistent with

ideas described in the story on eating disorders) and certain of its
far-flung projection partners were found to be important for regulating
the unified nature of the self and its experience. And so one can accept
that there may be a distributed origin of any action, and of the self as
well, without abandoning the idea of the self as a real and biological
agent subject to precise scientific investigation. Meeting this
complexity head-on may eventually allow us to understand and treat (and
feel empathy for) the antisocial, who may have as much free will and
personal responsibility as any other person but who can often be cruel
to themselves, to their own selves, as well---perhaps through a
biologically definable form of detachment, or dissociation, from the
feelings of both self and others. As a physician, understanding this
last trait ---more than any other aspect---helps me care as I should,
and do, for these fellow human beings, despite everything.

• The future of this scientific journey---given our accelerating
progress toward accessing all the cells, connections, and activity
patterns of brain cells in animals during behavior---is leading us not
only to understanding and treatment of our own difficult and dangerous
design, but also to insight into one of the most profound mysteries of
the universe. Rivaling the question of Why are we here? is Why are we
aware? In 2019 optogenetic technology began to enable control of
mammalian behavior in a wholly new way, no longer just allowing control
of cells by type---the workhorse of optogenetics for its first fifteen
years---but also allowing control of activity in many single cells, or
individually specified neurons. Now we can pick, at will, tens or
hundreds of single cells for optogenetic control---cells selected from
among millions of neighbors by virtue of their location, their type, and
even their natural activity during experiences. This effect was achieved
by developing new microscopes, including holographic devices based on
liquid crystals. These machines take a massive leap beyond fiberoptics
to use holograms as the interface between light and the brain, allowing
a sort of sculpting of complex distributions of

light even in three dimensions---to control individual opsin-producing
neurons during behavior in a mammal such as a mouse. In one application
of this method, we can cause animals in complete darkness to behave as
if they were seeing specific visual objects of our own design. For
example, we can pick the cells that normally respond to vertical (but
not horizontal) stripes in the visual environment and then, without any
such visual stimulus, optogenetically turn on just those cells with our
holographic spots of light, testing to see if the mouse acts as if there
were vertical stripes present. Both the mouse and the mouse's brain in
fact behave as if the vertical stripes were there; peering into the
activity of many thousands of individual neurons in the primary visual
cortex (that part of the cortex that first receives information from the
retina), we can see that the rest of this circuitry---with all the
complexity of its immense number of cells---acts as it does during
natural perception of real vertical (but not horizontal) stripes. We now
find ourselves in an astonishing position: we can pick out groups of
cells that are naturally active during an experience and then (using
light and single-cell optogenetics) insert their activity patterns back
in without the experience; when we do so, the animal (and its brain)
both behave naturalistically as they would when perceiving a real
stimulus. The animal behavior showing correct discrimination is similar
whether the sensory stimulus is natural or provided entirely by
optogenetics---and the detailed, real-time, cellular-level internal
representation of the sensory discrimination across volumes of the brain
is also similar, whether the sensory stimulus is natural or provided
entirely by optogenetics. As far as we can tell, then (with the caveat
that I will never know what another animal, human or not, is truly
experiencing subjectively), we are directly inserting something
resembling a specific sensation as defined by natural behavior and
natural internal representation. We were intrigued to see how few cells
we could stimulate to mimic the percept, and we found that a handful was
enough---as little as two to twenty cells, depending on how well trained
the animal had been. So few cells sufficed, in fact, that a new question
had to be asked: why are mammals not frequently distracted by chance
synchrony events among a few cells that happen to have similar natural
responsivity---thus fooling the brain into concluding (wrongly) that the
object these cells are designed to detect must

be present? In some people that may happen, as in Charles Bonnet
syndrome, where people who suffer adult-onset blindness can experience
complex visual hallucinations; the visual system seems to act as if all
is too quiet, reaching to create something, anything, out of the noise.
I treated a patient at the VA hospital with this syndrome: an amiable
and elderly veteran, entirely blind, who would see fully formed visions,
often of sheep and goats grazing harmlessly in the middle distance. We
found his visions could be reduced with an antiepileptic medication
called valproic acid, but in the end we discharged him with no
prescription; he had grown attached to what his deprived visual cortex
had decided to provide for him. More broadly, such spontaneous unwanted
output---of any part of the brain due to spurious correlations of a few
of its cells---could be a principle underlying many psychiatric
disorders, ranging from the actual auditory hallucinations of
schizophrenia, to unwanted motor outputs and thoughts of tic disorders
and Tourette's syndrome, to out-of-control cognitions like those of
eating and anxiety disorders. The mammalian brain is poised perilously
close to the level where noise might escape to be treated like a
signal---an insight important both for the basic neuroscience of natural
mammalian behavioral variability and for clinical psychiatry. Beyond
science and medicine, philosophical puzzles surrounding subjective
awareness suddenly become better posed with this multiplesingle-cell
control. Indeed, new life has even been breathed into philosophical
thought experiments (Gedankenexperimente, as the physicists Ernst Mach
and Albert Einstein might have said, following a tradition extending
back at least to Galileo), ancient in formulation and discussion. The
modernized version of an old story might run as follows: Suppose one
could control (as with this new form of single-cell optogenetics) the
exact pattern of activity, over some period of time, of every cell in
the brain of an animal capable of subjective sensation---say, of a
pleasurable, intensely rewarding, internal feeling. And suppose such
control could even be precisely guided by first observing and recording
those activity patterns in the same animal during natural exposure to a
real, rewarding stimulus---just as we already know we can do for simple
visual percepts in the visual cortex. The seemingly trivial question,
then, is: would the animal feel the same subjective sensation? We
already know that a mouse and its visual cortex

will both behave as if it had received and processed the real
stimulus---but would the animal also feel the same internal awareness,
experiencing its quality beyond the information itself, like natural
subjective consciousness except now when the activity pattern is
presented artificially? It is important that this be a thought
experiment---of course we cannot fully know the subjective experience of
another individual, even of another human being, nor have we yet
achieved the total control contemplated here ---but like Einstein's
original Gedankenexperimente that illuminated relativity so powerfully,
this thought experiment rapidly brings us to a conceptual crisis---one
that, in its eventual resolution, could be highly informative. The
problem is that answering either yes or no to this question seems
essentially impossible. Saying no implies there is more to subjective
sensations than the cellular patterns of activity in the brain---since
in the thought experiment, we are allowed to match the precise patterns
of all physical phenomena that cellular activity elicits, including
neuromodulators, biochemical events, and so on that are the natural
consequences of neural activity. As a result, we have no framework to
understand how that answer could be no. How can there be more to what
the cells of the brain do than what they do? Saying yes raises equally
unsettling questions. If all the cells are actively controlled and a
subjective sensation is being felt, then there is no reason the cells
all need to be in the head of the animal. They could be spread all
around the world, and controlled in the same way with the same relative
timing, over as long a time period as was interesting, and the
subjective sensation should still somehow be felt, somewhere, somehow,
by the animal ---an animal no longer existing in any discrete physical
form. In a natural brain, neurons are near one another, or connected to
one another, only to influence one another. But in this thought
experiment, neurons no longer need to influence one another---the exact
effect of what that influence would have been, over any period of time,
is already being provided by the artificial stimulus. This answer
intuitively seems wrong, as well, though we are not sure how---it just
seems to fail an absurdity test. How, and why, could individual neurons
spread around the world still give rise to the inner feelings of a mouse
or a human? The question is only interesting because we are

considering an inner feeling. If instead we were to divide a basketball
into a hundred billion cell-like parts to be distributed around the
world and controlled individually to move as they would during a bounce,
there would be no philosophical debate as to whether this new system
feels as though it were bouncing. The answer would be, presumably: no
more or less than the original ball. We are left with a philosophical
problem, one that optogenetics has framed sharply and clearly. There are
certain to be many such mysteries about the brain, like the nature of
our inner subjective states, that don't fall into current scientific
frameworks: questions that are deep and unanswered, but some that---it
seems now---can be well posed. And those subjective states, called
qualia or feelings, are not just abstract or academic concepts. These
are the same inner states that were the central focus of this volume,
that first brought me to psychiatry years ago, each one inseparable from
its own projection across time---over seconds, and over generations.
These subjective experiences underlie our common identity and define the
path we have traveled, together, as humanity---even if shared only as
stories, in a book or around a fire. OceanofPDF.com

For our family OceanofPDF.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I

am deeply indebted to so many people who helped nurture this work, and
who provided motivation and energy through difficult times. Heartfelt
gratitude to Aaron Andalman, Sarah Caddick, Patricia Churchland, Louise
Deisseroth, Scott Delp, Lief Fenno, Lindsay Halladay, Alizeh Iqbal,
Karina Keus, Tina Kim, Anatol Kreitzer, Chris Kroeger, Rob Malenka,
Michelle Monje, Laura Roberts, Neil Shubin, Vikaas Sohal, Kay Tye, Xiao
Wang, and Moriel Zelikowsky for their notes and comments--- along with
my perceptive and tireless literary agent Jeff Silberman, and my deeply
thoughtful editor and publisher Andy Ward, whose belief in these stories
was always greater than my own. I am most grateful to all the people who
shared this path with me--- merging their stories with my own, for a
time. OceanofPDF.com

NOTES Brief references, for background on the science within each story,
are included here. All of the articles are freely accessible; you can
either copy and paste the link into a browser search bar (if you're
reading on a connected device) or for the notes labeled PMC (for
PubMedCentral) go to https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/ and at
the search bar enter the digital identifier shown (for PMC4790845, enter
4790845), whereupon articles can be read online or free pdfs downloaded.

OceanofPDF.com

PROLOGUE actual memory storage needing no guidance or supervision:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hopfield_network;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backpropagation. In optogenetics we borrow
genes from diverse microbes:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4790845/. tricks from
chemistry are used to build transparent hydrogels:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5846712/. All the
interesting parts remain locked in place, still within 3-D tissue:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6359929/. national and
global initiatives to understand brain circuitry:
https://braininitiative.nih.gov/sites/default/files/pdfs/brain2025_508c.pdf;
https://braininitiative.nih.gov/strategic-planning/acd-working-group/brain-research-throughadvancing-innovative-neurotechnologies.
many thousands of insights into how cells give rise to brain function
and behavior: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4069282/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4790845/. connections
defined by their origin and trajectory through the brain could now be
precisely controlled:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4780260/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5729206/.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 1: STOREHOUSE OF TEARS they traveled into, and dwelt within, our
cellular forebears more than two billion years ago:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5426843/. with
optogenetics, microbial DNA has yet again returned to animal cells:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5723383/. how much of
modern Eurasian human genomes arose from this interaction---about 2
percent: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5100745/. a hidden
cave, alone in a final redoubt near the coast of Iberia:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gorham%27s_Cave;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6485383/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5935692/. from an extension
of the amygdala called the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6690364/. A fiberoptic can
be placed not in the BNST but in an outlying region:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4069282/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3154022/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3775282/. In the mouse
version of place preference:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5262197/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4743797/. Thus a complex
inner state can be deconstructed into independent features:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6690364/. parenting, in the
form of intimate care of mammals for their young, was soon deconstructed
into component parts, mapped onto projections across the brain:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5908752/. Tears are
powerful for driving emotional connection:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4882350/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5363367/. missing even this
one part of the conversation may come at a cost:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4934120/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6402489/. collections of
cells, sixth and seventh and parabrachial, jostle together in a small
spot in the pons: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cranial_nerves. In 2019
cells were studied across the entire brain of the tiny zebrafish:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6726130/. optogenetics and
other methods had implicated these same two structures in mammals:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5929119/. Even the tiny
nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans appears to calculate:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3942133/. Each mammalian
species, on average, gets a run of about a million years:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Background_extinction_rate. population
sizes around the world may have plummeted to a few thousand individuals:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5161557/;

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4381518/.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 2: FIRST BREAK the 767, slowly banking harborward, nearing the
burning steel tower:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Airlines_Flight_175. Mood elevation
has the capability to bring forth energy:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3137243/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2847485/. mania is often
not threat-triggered at all, and does not even approach utility:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2796427/. bouffée délirante
in West Africa and Haiti, a state of sudden agitated behavior:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4421900/. broken fragments
of the yolk genes persist, even within our own genomes:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2267819/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5474779/. Cave fish and
cave salamanders---in sunless colonies, blocked off from the surface
world: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5182419/. dopamine
neurons have attracted attention for their known roles in guiding
motivation and reward seeking:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4160519/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4188722/. In 2015 the
dopamine and circadian aspects were brought together with optogenetics:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4492925/. the dopamine
neuron population is not monolithic but composed of many distinct types
that can be separably identified early in mammalian brain development:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6362095/. ankyrin 3 (also
known as ankyrin G), which organizes the electrical infrastructure:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3856665/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2703780/. In 2017 a mouse
line was created with "knocked out"---insufficient---ankyrin 3:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5625892/.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 3: CARRYING CAPACITY Two or three hundred milliseconds elapse
before the response to a ping:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC166261/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4467230/. Despite anxiety
and cognitive impairment, Williams patients can seem extremely socially
adept: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4896837/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3378107/. "That incredibly
thin, hairlike wasp waist":
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3016887/. "ants and hornets
and bees, all the social groups---later reverted away from this life
cycle":
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982217300593?via%3Dihub;
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982213010567?via%3Dihub.
researchers studying parenting in mice had used optogenetics:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5908752/. many of the genes
linked to autism are related to these processes of electrical and
chemical excitability:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4402723/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4624267/;
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/484113v3. people on the autism
spectrum exhibit signs of increased excitability:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4105225/. speculated that a
unifying theme in autism could be an increased power of neuronal
excitation ---relative to countervailing influences like inhibition:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6748642/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6742424/. elevating the
activity of excitatory cells in the prefrontal cortex caused an enormous
deficit in social behavior:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4155501/. mice (altered in
a single gene called Cntnap2):
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3390029/. this
autism-related social deficit could be corrected by optogenetic
interventions: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5723386/.
causing high excitability of prefrontal excitatory cells (an
intervention that elicited social deficits) actually did reduce the
information-carrying capacity of the cells themselves:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4155501/. "The tree thrives
in salt, and makes the soil salty too":
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5570027/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4836421/. PTSD (a common
and deadly disease that is often resistant to treatment by medication):
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5126802/.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 4: BROKEN SKIN Skin arises from ectoderm, in embryos:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Germ_layer. a meteor strike upended
everything: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tRPu5u_Pizk. sensory skin
organs then spread across the body:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4245816/. the patient or
the psychiatrist might fit into a role from the past:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6481907/. Suicide is more
common in borderline than in any other psychiatric disorder:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4102288/. an unjust burden:
psychological or physical trauma at a young age:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3402130/. trauma during
dependency---early in life when warmth and care are needed at all
costs--- predicts nonsuicidal self-injury later:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5201161/. Our brains are
building even basic structure---the electrical insulation, the myelin:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867414012987?via%3Dihub.
an individual can instead be guided chiefly by suppression of internal
discomfort as the motivation for action:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5723384/. cause animals to
become more or less aggressive, defensive, social, sexual, hungry,
thirsty, sleepy, or energetic:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5708544/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4790845/. swift to react
strongly with value assignments:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5472065/. causes the animal
to begin to avoid the harmless room, as if it were a source of intense
suffering: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4743797/.
turning down the dopamine neurons in the midbrain naturally, just as
optogenetics does experimentally:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3493743/. early-life stress
and helplessness can increase habenula activity:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6726130/. outpatient
referral for a specialized group behavioral therapy:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6584278/.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 5: THE FARADAY CAGE installing a true modern Faraday cage as a
shield: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faraday_cage. the Kalman filter,
an algorithm for modeling complex unknown systems:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalman_filter. "Optimal filters will still
block a few things that you actually wanted to go through":
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chebyshev_filter;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Butterworth_filter. Matthews had imagined
something he called an "Air Loom":
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Tilly_Matthews. schizophrenia
genetics: the collection of DNA sequence information from human genomes:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4112379/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4912829/. evidence that
disease symptoms are more common and strong in city dwellers:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3494055/.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6: CONSUMMATION cognitive and behavioral therapies can help in
anorexia nervosa: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6181276/.
Medications are used not as cures, not to strike at the heart of the
disease: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4418625/. then
eating disorders together show the highest death rates of any
psychiatric disease:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2907776/. the diversity of
genes that can be involved, as with many psychiatric disorders:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5581217/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6097237/. Controlling the
walking rhythms of the brainstem and spinal cord:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5937258/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4844028/. the first
optogenetic control of free mammalian behavior was in the hypothalamus:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6744371/. cause the hunger
or thirst behaviors, actually driving the consumption of food or water:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5723384/. specific social
cells could suppress feeding, driving a resistance, even in naturally
hungry mice: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6447429/. When
a mouse is fully water-sated but the deep thirst neurons are
optogenetically driven:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6711472. entorhinal cortex
and hippocampus, two structures involved in navigation and memory:
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4w36z6rj. a human subject is asked to
sit quietly and think of nothing in particular, to simply be with one's
self: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1157105/.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 7: MORO infarcts, spots of dead tissue that are the outcome of
strokes, can be detected by computed tomography:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vascular_dementia. magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) can show the small vessel blockade of vascular dementia:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3405254/. 350 million years
ago, when the first air-breathing fishes emerged onto land:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3903263/. global collapse
in human populations bottoming out only fifty thousand years ago:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5161557/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4381518/. the few
medications available only slightly slow the steady progression of the
disease: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6309083/.
anhedonia in senior populations with cognitive impairment:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2575050;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4326597/. the greater the
accumulated volume of those lacunae in white matter:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2575050/. valence of
release from anxiety is set in part by projections from the BNST to
reward circuitry: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6690364/.
absent everything but the optogenetic reactivation of a few of the
fear-memory neurons:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3331914/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6737336/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4825678/. synaptic strength
changes indeed can store memories in an automatic way:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hopfield_network;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backpropagation. synaptic strength changes
of the right kind can happen in the real world:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1693150/;
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867400804845?via%3Dihub;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1693149/. Both effects are
plausibly useful for memory storage, based on the theoretical work:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5318375/. a connection from
one part of the brain to another can be made light-sensitive, and then
highor low-frequency light pulses can be provided:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3154022/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3775282/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6744370/. selective effects
on behavior can be exerted by projection-specific synaptic strength
changes: https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:38251;
https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:26937;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4210354/. Projections
fundamentally embody how effectively different parts of the brain can
engage with each other, whether in health or disease:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4069282/.

interregional connectivity strength predicts interregional activity
correlations: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/422477v2.
anhedonia for music in human beings:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5135354/. brain region
representing hierarchies of kinship relationships:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-16489-x/. gene expression
patterns that determine how cellular diversity and axon guidance
implement brain wiring:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6086934/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6447408/;
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.31.016972v2;
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.07.02.184051v1;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5292032/. the Moro reflex:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moro_reflex.

OceanofPDF.com

EPILOGUE the very same brainstem tumor that had grown in the little girl
with eyes misaligned:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5891832;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5462626;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6214371. the last
Neanderthal may have been also the last survivor of a wave of modern
humans: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4933530/;
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/687368v1. exploring how the
light-gated protein called channelrhodopsin actually works:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5723383/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6340299/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6317992/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4160518/. research into
microbial light responses over the past 150 years:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5723383/. like the
performance artist Joan Jonas said about her art in 2018:
https://twitter.com/KyotoPrize/status/1064378354168606721. depending on
the study or population, from 1 to 7 percent:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK55333/. An easy explanation is
that extinction follows very quickly from technology:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermi_paradox. There is a heritable
component: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6309228/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5048197/. linked to
sociopathy or aggression:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2430409/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6274606/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6433972/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5796650/. a frenzy of
violent aggression toward another mouse:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3075820/. the fascinating
domain of the philosophical treatise:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0896627313011355?via%3Dihub.
In 2020, recording the activity of cells broadly across mouse and human
brains: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7553818/. control
of cells by type---the workhorse of optogenetics for its first fifteen
years: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5296409/. but also
allowing control of activity in many single cells, or individually
specified neurons:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5734860/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3518588/. Now we can pick,
at will, tens or hundreds of single cells for optogenetic control:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6447429/;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6711485;
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/394999v1.

we can pick the cells that normally respond to vertical (but not
horizontal) stripes:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6711485. new life has even
been breathed into philosophical thought experiments:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einstein%27s_thought_experiments.

OceanofPDF.com

PERMISSIONS/CREDITS Grateful acknowledgment is made to the following for
permission to reprint previously published material: The Edna
St. Vincent Millay Society c/o The Permissions Company, LLC: "Epitaph
for the Race of Man: X" from Collected Poems by Edna St. Vincent Millay,
copyright © 1934, 1962 by Edna St. Vincent Millay and Norma Millay
Ellis. Reprinted by permission of The Permissions Company, LLC on behalf
of Holly Peppe, Literary Executor, The Edna St. Vincent Millay Society,
www.millay.org. Faber and Faber Limited: Excerpt from "Stars at
Tallapoosa" from Collected Poems by Wallace Stevens. Reprinted by
permission of Faber and Faber Limited. Indiana University Press: Excerpt
from Metamorphoses by Ovid, translated by Rolfe Humphries, copyright ©
1955 by Indiana University Press and copyright renewed 1983 by Winifred
Davies. Reprinted with permission of Indiana University Press.

OceanofPDF.com

ABOUT THE AUTHOR Karl Deisseroth is professor of bioengineering and
psychiatry at Stanford University. He received his undergraduate degree
summa cum laude at Harvard, and his MD/PhD at Stanford, where he
completed psychiatry training and is boardcertified by the American
Board of Psychiatry and Neurology. Deisseroth is known for creating and
applying new technologies for studying the brain, including
optogenetics---for which he was the winner of the 2018 Kyoto Prize and
the 2020 Heineken Prize, among many other major international awards.
Deisseroth has five children and lives near Stanford University, where
he teaches and directs Stanford's undergraduate degree in
bioengineering, and treats patients with mood disorders and autism.
Deisseroth helped craft the multibillion-dollar ongoing U.S. national
BRAIN Initiative, and is a member of the National Academy of Medicine,
the National Academy of Sciences, and the National Academy of
Engineering.

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

What's next on

your reading list?

Discover your next great read! Get personalized book picks and
up-to-date news about this author.

Sign up now. OceanofPDF.com


