OceanofPDF.com

The Disorganized Mind OceanofPDF.com

The Disorganized Mind COACHING YOUR ADHD BRAIN TO TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR
TIME, TASKS, AND TALENTS

Nancy A. Ratey, Ed.M, M.C.C., S.C.A.C.

OceanofPDF.com

THE DISORGANIZED MIND. Copyright © 2008 by Nancy A. Ratey.

Foreword copyright © 2008 by John J. Ratey, M.D. Afterword copyright ©
2008 by Sam Goldstein, Ph.D. All rights reserved. Printed in the United
States of America. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any
manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical articles or reviews. For information,
address St. Martin's Press, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010. The
circumstances and experiences described in this book are all drawn from
the author's work as an ADHD coach over the past fifteen years. The
names and other identifying characteristics of clients and their family
members have been changed to respect their privacy. Some of the material
in this book has appeared, in different format, in Clinician's Guide to
Adult ADHD Assessment and Intervention, edited by Sam Goldstein and Anne
Teeter Ellison (Academic Press, 2002). www.stmartins.com Book design by
Mary A. Wirth LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
AVAILABLE UPON REQUEST

ISBN-13: 978-0-312-35533-3 ISBN-10: 0-312-35533-5

First Edition: April 2008 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 OceanofPDF.com

THIS BOOK IS IN MEMORY OF

My father Clair William Young (8/30/1924--5/7/2004) No matter what, you
never lost hope, and you always believed in me. Your determination and
perseverance in helping me taught me to never give up. Your spirit lives
on!

My best friend Cara Dunne-Yates (3/17/1970--10/20/2004) Your immense
love for life, laughter, and adventure was a source of great strength
and joy to me. You were the ultimate teacher of how to live in the
moment and not sweat the small stuff. I miss you greatly.

My colleague in arms Laura Whitworth, MCC (10/15/1947--2/28/2007) Thank
you for sharing a vision with me. We did it! Your gift of being able to
"hold the space" allowed me to always keep my eye on the bigger picture
for that vision to grow. OceanofPDF.com

Contents

Acknowledgments Foreword by John J. Ratey, M.D. PART I Coaching Chapter
1 How I Came to Coaching Chapter 2 How Coaching Works Chapter 3
Self-Coaching Chapter 4 Finding the A-N-S-W-E-R PART II Coaching the
ADHD Brain Chapter 5 Time Mismanagement Chapter 6 Procrastination
Chapter 7 Impulsivity Chapter 8 Distractibility Chapter 9 Transitions
PART III Strategies for a Balanced Life Chapter 10 Strategies of the
Home Environment Chapter 11 Strategies for Maintaining Physical Health
Chapter 12 Strategies for Maintaining Spiritual and Mental Wellness PART
IV Living or Working with Someone with ADHD Chapter 13 Loving Someone
with ADHD, or, Did I Sign Up for This? Chapter 14 Working for or with
Someone with ADHD, or, Right-Brained Exec Needs LeftBrained Right Hand!
Final Thoughts Afterword by Sam Goldstein, Ph.D. Appendix A Index of
Strategies Appendix B ADHD Resources Index About the Author

OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgments

I am blessed and humbled to do the work I do. To each and every one of
my clients, thank you for letting me into your lives. It is an honor and
privilege to have been part of your journey. Were it not for your
courage to step forward, to put your trust in me, and to share your
pain, struggles, and triumphs, there would be no book. I especially
thank those clients and colleagues who shared their insights with me as
I planned and wrote this book. Ned Hallowell, the field of ADHD coaching
would not exist were it not for you. You saw the missing link, the way
to fill the gap, to create a way for individuals with ADHD to live a
more fulfilling life on a day-to-day basis. It was coaching. Sue
Sussman, I am forever indebted to you for opening the door and taking
that leap of faith with me to create the National Coaching Network. It
was your vision that breathed life into coaching. And to Bonnie
Favorite, for helping to give shape and form to our initial training
model so we could share coaching with the world, thank you. Madelyn
Griffith-Haynie and Eric Kohner, your pioneering efforts set the stage
for ADHD coaching. Thank you for your tireless efforts and for helping
to pave the way for coaching to become what it is today. Also, thank you
to ADDA and CHADD for your years of support for the concept of ADHD
coaching. There are many people who either directly or indirectly
supported me in giving birth to this book. I thank each of you for your
contributions. Thank you to Faith Hamlin, my agent; Sheila Curry Oakes,
my editor at St. Martin's Press; Whitney Barrows, my "Sancho Panza";
Sherry Lowry, a wonderful coach; Joe Blackmore, Gordon Curtis, Sam
Goldstein, Jackie

Grupe, Ben Hillyard, Pat and Peter Latham, Karen Lu, Theresa Maitland,
Terry Matlen, Rich Mintzer, Kathleen Nadeau, Patty Quinn, Sally Snowman,
Dean and Sari Solden, Robert Tudisco, and Renee Van Notten. One of the
most difficult aspects of writing this book was sustaining the energy it
demanded, something that would have been insurmountable without the
support, encouragement, and love of my family, friends, and colleagues.
Thank you all for being there when I needed you and for contributing
your memories, insights, and words. The process of writing a book is
difficult to explain. It certainly takes a lot out of the person writing
it, but I think it takes an equal toll on the person's family. From
Ohio, Michigan, and Brazil, mine reached out to me here in Boston on a
regular basis, cheering me on. To each of you, I offer love and
continued thanks for the encouragement you gave to me through it all. I
am eternally grateful to my mother, June Young, whose enduring love and
support have been my wings. Thank you for teaching me to laugh and for
laughing with me, still. To my friend and writer, Maureen Ackerman,
thank you for giving voice to my experiences and for letting your
imagination and belief in possibility inform the pages of this book. And
to my husband, John, there are no words to express how much I appreciate
your steadfastness. None of this would have been possible without your
unwavering love, patience, support, and expertise. You teach me, always,
what "I love you" means. OceanofPDF.com

Foreword by John J. Ratey, M.D.

In the late 1980s, when Ned Hallowell and I were first refining our
ideas about ADHD that led to our three Distraction books, we realized
that when working with our adult ADHD patients, we were doing something
different from simply exploring the past with these patients in an
attempt to change their futures. We were doing neither classical
psychotherapy nor basic diagnosis and drug treatment. Our work was
different from therapy and could be done by someone who had enough
training and awareness of what ADHD was all about. Ned coined the term
ADD coaching---we called it ADD back then---and he wrote about this in
Driven to Distraction. About that time, Nancy and I married. I became
aware that coaching was already happening in the treatment of dyslexia
and that Nancy was a natural coach. She soon teamed up with Susan
Sussman to combine their experiences and thoughts into a formalized
curriculum to teach others how to coach adults with ADHD. Since that
time, I have come to understand and appreciate more about what ADHD is
in the brain and what coaching offers in response to this type of brain
difference. One of the biggest problems for patients with ADHD is that
they cannot sustain the motivation to accomplish their goals, even when
they have the talent and skill to do so. This fact generates many of the
pejorative labels that those with ADHD accrue; they are seen as lazy,
inept, and undependable. In brain lingo, the coach acts as an external
frontal cortex of the left hemisphere, or specifically the executive
functioning brain area, helping the individual to maintain arousal and
remember motivation to succeed. Most individuals with ADHD eventually
learn that they need something to help them gain control over their
lives, and those who come looking for

help are, at various levels, ready to change. As a psychiatrist, I work
with my patients on therapeutic issues, diagnosing and fine-tuning their
medications. Often, however, as these issues are being worked on, some
of the daily living issues persist. When patients are at the point of
really wanting to tackle these issues and become masters of their own
lives, they seek out the service of a coach to move forward on their
own. Time and time again, I've seen how Nancy helps her clients
acknowledge their difficulties and begin to develop what I have called
"the militant vigilance" that is so necessary to deal with their
deficits. The relationship, as it is in any generative relationship
focusing on personal growth, is highlighted in Nancy's work with
clients. Changing the brain is hard, but you can teach an old dog new
tricks, and the kind of humor-filled bond that develops between Nancy
and her clients helps to cement and further their attempts at changing.
Coaching works at many levels. The relationship helps by increasing
arousal and alertness in the accountability and obligations that set up
what I call "good guilt." ADHD clients are often overwhelmed with guilt
and shame at not fulfilling what they know they can do. But in Nancy's
evolved system, clients learn to set their goals and identify that which
they wish to become without the guilt and shame frequently associated
with ADHD. The coaching experience also helps the ADHD brain forgo
immediate gratification and keep in mind the concept of future reward.
If individuals with ADHD could hold on to the motive, remember the
consequences, and keep the reward in mind, they could move forward
toward completing tasks and meeting goals. Rather than maintaining focus
on a distant goal, however, the ADHD brain's attention is typically
grabbed by anything that is stimulating at that moment. They can't
start, they can't stay with it, they do not have the time right, and
they lose focus when the frustration levels are too great or they
literally have forgotten their motivation. A coach is the remedy for
many of these troubles, some of which can also be helped by medication.
The coach represents cohesion for the ADHD brain, which has little
experience with consistency. Coach and client work together to develop a
sense of the future and the idea of being "goal-oriented." Most
important, the coach reminds the client about motivation and rewards,
thereby helping

to avoid the old guilt associated with failure. Working with and
reporting to a coach establishes a challenge and creates stimulation to
reach the goal. Sharing patients with Nancy and observing her over the
years as she's worked with her clients to help them become their own
executive have demonstrated to me that her coaching principles really
work. In the relationship with Nancy, her clients are continually
reminded of their longterm mission and goals. She gets them to focus and
stay on track. Her strategies help them learn to set up their
environment in the right way, so they can corral their attention through
their own actions and become more productive. The brain is amazingly
plastic, and we learn anything new by changing the brain so that
rewiring occurs. Eventually, the more practice that individuals with
ADHD have structuring, planning, and anticipating ADHD-like troubles,
the more they are training their brain to develop new habits. They
become more effective themselves, and propelled by success to do even
more, they move to self-coaching, incorporating the model of the coach
and using it as an internal memory to achieve self-regulation and
mastery of their lives. Call me biased, if you will, for suggesting that
the insights Nancy has gained from her personal journey might be reason
enough for readers to trust her methodology in compensating for the
symptoms of ADHD. But Nancy's perspective is broader and deeper than
what she knows from living with her own ADHD. Through her years of
experience coaching others with the disorder, she has seen firsthand
that people can change their lives. The book demonstrates the power of
coaching and/or self-coaching and the difference it can make for those
with ADHD. OceanofPDF.com

PART I

Coaching

"Who are you, and what do you love?" a close friend once asked me. I'm
outgoing and talkative by nature, and I'm rarely at a loss for words,
but I was stunned into silence by my friend's question. I had no idea
how to respond. "Don't worry," she said, sensing my discomfort. "I
didn't expect you to answer. I only wanted you to imagine the
possibilities of who you might be." It's hard to know what different
roads any of us might have traveled had we early on imagined our lives
shaped by our loves, by our bone-deep passions and beliefs. But I don't
think that when we begin to imagine is what matters. What matters is
that it happens finally, that we come to believe such a life is
possible, and that we determine, at last, to live it. It has been awhile
since my friend posed her question, and I've thought about her words a
lot. Today I can answer confidently, "I'm Nancy Ratey, and I love the
same things that most of us love: family, friends, some modicum of
personal success." But I can also answer another way: "I'm Nancy Ratey,
life coach, and I love that the ADHD that once might have devastated me
has translated into my life's passion and work: helping others with ADHD
cope."

This is a book about possibility for those struggling with the symptoms
of ADHD. It's about the possibility of taking control, of maintaining
control, of loving the way that you live. It's about how I did it, and
it's about my belief that you can do it, too. OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 1

How I Came to Coaching

"Nancy! When are you ever going to learn from your mistakes?" Decades
later, I can still hear my father's voice, a frustrated cry of
accusation and plea as he turned toward my stammering self. I had left a
crayon in the pocket of my best white pants, and now the pants, and my
father's white underwear, had turned a perfect pink in the wash. I had
done so many things like it before, and both of us knew I would do them
again. In retrospect, I can't blame my father for the things he often
said. Although I would never have admitted it as a child, I was
fortunate to have been brought up in a strict and structured home.
Looking back, I have no idea how my parents did it. I was the last of
their four children, the oldest of whom was twelve when I was born, and
I was three when they began moving us back and forth across several
continents, all in conjunction with my father's work and all within a
ten-year span. Clearly, someone had to take hold of the reins if we were
to function as a family, and my father, a passionate and loving man of
German heritage, seemed perfectly suited for the task. Maybe he had come
to his role in the family naturally, or maybe it was his background in
academia and the military that had shaped his intractable ways, but the
value my father placed on order and structure was evident in everything
he did. My friends likened my home to a military boot camp, where we
observed daily routines and abided by the strictest codes of conduct.
There were time limits for almost every activity imaginable: the
two-minute phone call, the three-minute shower, the thirty-minute meal.

Not one of us was spared our individual trials. My brother, Jed, always
as slow as the turtles he collected, could never make it out of the
house on time to catch the school bus, so my father developed a routine
to get him moving. Stopwatch in hand, Dad timed Jed repeatedly while he
dressed for school, packed his backpack, and walked to the bus stop.
Then Dad conducted the drill: Do it once, return and repeat, do it
again, return and repeat, over and over, time after time, day after day,
until at last Jed was able to meet the requirement of Dad's clock. Soon
after I'd turned twelve, one of my daily chores was sweeping the kitchen
floor. "Stop!" he yelled, after he'd been observing me for a while.
"Watch what you're doing. The angle of the broom is all wrong."
Determined to demonstrate a more efficient way to get the job done, he
came over to me, tilting the broom at a sharper angle and moving my arms
along with it. "See?" he said. "If you hold the broom this way, you get
more dirt per sweep and you don't have to work as hard. And look, you'll
get the job done faster." From then on, no ordinary task would ever be
the same, becoming instead more like a puzzle to be solved than a job to
be endured. I'm not sure why I didn't hear my father's words as
criticism the way my siblings and my friends did. It's enough to know
that something clicked in me, and it has stayed with me ever since,
influencing the way I react to others' remarks and shaping, in turn, how
I speak to them. I can see now that I was learning something about
listening, about processing others' comments as feedback to be
considered rather than as judgment to be taken to heart. But that's an
observation I am making as an adult. As a child, all the listening in
the world couldn't cure the stuttering for which I was teased and the
math problems I never could solve, so I struggled through special
remedial classes, misbehaving often, but managing to accomplish what
would have been impossible without my father's intervention: I graduated
from high school with honors. True to form, my father had designed a
tight schedule for me, with specific blocks of time for each piece of
homework, and to make sure that I'd stay at attention, he would check in
on me often--- what seemed like every five minutes to my impatient young
mind---without fail, and with his trademark tap on the table to keep me
on task. I didn't know it as it was happening, of course, but through
all those rituals I was also learning about structure and
accountability, concepts that

would serve me later in life and ultimately become the basis of some of
my coaching principles. My father was making me use my brain, and he was
helping me analyze what I was doing and why. The Diagnosis Whatever
stability I might have lost as a child traveling back and forth overseas
was easily offset by what I gained. Living in and learning about other
cultures while I also learned their languages shaped my ability to
understand a multitude of people without prejudice or judgment. The
constant during all those years was my father, whose sense of order and
discipline set parameters within which I could thrive. But left to my
own devices at The Ohio State University, I was lost, with a litany of
reasons why. I could never get to class on time. I had no defined
curriculum. I spent hours preparing to study yet never got around to
actually studying. When I did sit down, I either shuffled papers for
hours, not knowing what to start working on first, or jumped from one
thing to another, ultimately accomplishing nothing. It seemed as though
I knew what had to be done, but I could never get around to doing it,
even when I stayed up all night in desperation. My frustration was deep,
for sure, but it was probably equaled by that of my professors, who
could not understand how someone they described as verbal and bright
would be late turning in every paper or would perform so poorly on
tests. Something was obviously amiss, one told me. He suggested a
different kind of test. This one revealed dyslexia. "What's in a Name?"
"Give me a name," one of my colleagues once told me about the sudden
swelling in her legs, "and at least I'll know what I'm up against. Then
I can figure out how to deal with it." Hearing that I wasn't stupid,
that I wasn't really the "space cadet" my siblings had labeled me, I
could begin to contemplate the possibilities of a wider world.
Immediately, I took advantage of accommodations made by the university
for students with dyslexia, and my performance improved dramatically,
partly because of my own efforts and partly because of my

father's continued monitoring at the weekly lunches we'd arrange. A few
years later, buoyed by degrees in international relations, Portuguese,
and Spanish, I headed off to Cambridge, Massachusetts, where I worked
for eight months as a foreign student adviser to candidates in the
master's degree in public policy program before the position folded and
the increasing confidence with which I had headed east slowly
evaporated. For two years I was unemployed, unable to keep even a
handful of temporary jobs. In one sense, my employers were right about
my shortcomings: I did misfile papers; I did cross phone lines as a
receptionist; I really couldn't type or spell. But those problems
notwithstanding, I truly believed I had much to offer. I had grown up on
three different continents, and I spoke several languages. I also had
useful analytical and people skills. Yet to a prospective employee, that
rich life experience could not compensate for either my inability to do
basic administrative work or my obvious challenges in reading and
writing. It has been more than twenty years since those dark days in
Cambridge, and sometimes I still wonder if something else had been
hovering just below the surface of potential employers' minds. At the
time, it seemed there were more misconceptions than facts about
dyslexia, and I often felt I was the target of silent discrimination
because I was so open about my own. My diagnosis was double-edged. It
made available to me services that helped me succeed, even as it
prompted work-related doubts that I actually could. At Harvard Going to
Harvard changed my life, but not for the obvious reasons. Few, if any,
would have predicted that I'd earn a graduate degree, especially those
remedial high school teachers who had often assigned me detention. But
given my wandering attention and inability to sit still, neither would
they have been surprised at the difficulties I experienced before I had
the degree in hand. As a proud student in the master's degree program in
administration, planning, and social policy at the Harvard Graduate
School of Education, I wanted to be a model of excellence, completing my
work on time and earning the grades my effort and preparation would
deserve. I was deluding

myself. Instead of the success I was envisioning, I experienced the
all-toofamiliar setbacks of the past. Like a tourist without a map on
foreign terrain, I wandered through a setting without structure, seeing
where I needed to go but unable to follow the road to get there. I was
crushed. Countless therapists and psychiatrists later, I was given a
name for the symptoms I was exhibiting and, with that name, a way to
understand my brain and what I might do to harness it. I was tested yet
again, I was diagnosed yet again, and with medication that I was
subsequently prescribed for the attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) the doctors discovered, I began to develop the self-awareness to
know when I was getting off track. Because I had learned what was wrong,
I could also learn how to make the situation right. For the first time
in my life, I found the missing link between desire and actual
performance as I created strategies for studying and a sense of
structure that would allow me to succeed. And for the second time in my
life, it was the diagnosis---the name---that made the difference in how
I'd proceed. Beyond the Classroom As I began to devise methods to keep
myself on top of studying at Harvard, I was also driven by a desire to
prevent others from experiencing the problems that I had faced in both
school and the workplace. To raise awareness of dyslexia and ADHD, I
began a speaker series that would eventually run for eight years and
which not only encouraged students to seek accommodations from the
administration, but also shaped how Harvard viewed students with
learning disabilities and ADHD. I quickly became a spokesperson for
students in higher education with learning disabilities and in 1988 I
was invited to testify before a United States congressional committee on
behalf of persons with learning disabilities to help implement the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). As a result of my increasing
visibility, others began to seek my advice on how to self-manage, and I
found myself passing on to them all the early lessons from my father
that I had incorporated into my life, especially structure,
accountability, and partnership. Meeting with them regularly for lunch
and dinner, as my father had met with me during my undergraduate

days, I monitored their progress and discussed their follow-through on
commitments they had made to themselves. Time and again, they told me
how amazed they were at the successes they began to achieve. I was
amazed, too, but more by the role I was playing, I think, than by the
results they were enjoying. I had grown up, after all, learning lessons
of accountability, and I knew firsthand what a sense of structure might
mean. What I hadn't realized before was that I could give to others the
gifts my father had given me. "A Coach by Any Other Name . . ." "Look
what you're doing here," my husband, John J. Ratey, psychiatrist and
associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School, said to me
one afternoon after yet another acquaintance had checked in with me by
phone. "You're coaching!" The informal work I had been doing with ADHD
students and staff members at Harvard had led to more formal support
groups with ADHD professionals, and some of those had begun to request
one-on-one appointments with me. Sometimes we'd meet for lunch, other
times we'd speak on the phone, and occasionally we'd correspond by
e-mail. How we communicated didn't really matter, though, for the
outcome of our talking remained consistent. By taking control of various
aspects of their lives, those who had sought my advice were
accomplishing more and enjoying life more than they had previously
imagined possible. And I was helping them to get where they wanted to
be, as excited as they were through every step of the journey. My
husband had been right. My own struggles with ADHD, the childhood
lessons of structure and self-discipline imparted by my father, and the
innate exuberance and energy that informed my work with others had led
my husband to the observation that would define my existence from that
point on: I was coaching! I was talking to clients! At once, I could
envision the rest of my life! Another name. Another life-altering
moment. Another word to add to my personal lexicon. Collaboration

Once I began my first real work with clients, I was on a mission to
understand just why and how coaching works so well for individuals with
ADHD, and I often shared clients with my husband, who specializes in the
diagnosis and treatment of ADHD. John, the psychiatrist, would
concentrate on the medical and therapeutic issues of our clients, and I
would help them with concrete, day-to-day matters. We'd spend hours
analyzing and discussing the impact coaching was having on the clients'
lives, and as we considered the brain's functioning, we were able to
finetune our understanding of the specific role the coach played from a
practical, as well as neuropsychiatric, perspective. Coaches, we saw,
allow clients to compensate for their brain differences by helping them
design strategies individualized for their respective needs. We also saw
that coaches serve as external checks on clients' internal
inconsistencies, partnering with clients in discovering ways to succeed.
Basically, the interplay between ADHD coaching and ADHD clients works
like this: PEOPLE WITH ADHD TYPICALLY NEED HELP IN THESE AREAS: •
Considering consequences before acting on a thought • Setting goals and
prioritizing • Keeping a goal in mind • Sequencing out steps toward a
goal • Directing attention to the task at hand • Creating and sticking
to timelines • Keeping track of time • Staying focused • Keeping
thoughts at bay • Not blurting out feelings COACHING HELPS CLIENTS IN
THESE AREAS: • Time management • Organizational skills • Establishing
priorities • Building self-acceptance • Building self-esteem • Mastering
interpersonal skills and techniques • Self-monitoring

As I learned more about the brain and the behavioral aspects of ADHD, I
was able to clarify my understanding of the role of the coach in a
client's life and hone my own coaching skills as well. I saw that the
partnership aspect of coaching accounted for most of the clients'
success, specifically because as I provided support, encouragement, and
expertise, they learned how to recognize and address particular problems
they were experiencing. The goal was to prepare clients for independence
and self-management. COACHING HELPS YOU CREATE "GOOD STRESS"

"Forget standing at the edge of the cliff," one client remarked about
his own need for increased intensity in order to get himself focused. "I
need to be standing on the blade!" People with ADHD often need a certain
level of stress in order to achieve a goal. To give them the feeling of
urgency they need, the sense that "I'm out of time here, so I have to
get this done," I work with my clients to create interim deadlines and
schedules, and I arrange phone check-ins to keep them on pace.
Essentially, I'm helping my clients create the "good stress" they need
to reach their goals. Ultimately, they learn how to create that
functional level of urgency for themselves. COACHING HELPS YOU CHANGE
EMOTIONAL RESPONSES

People with ADHD are often plagued by shame and guilt, and "I'm sorry"
is a programmed response. Part of my coaching responsibility is to help
my clients identify negative feelings and the many things that trigger
them so they can control their emotional responses. "You are not your
ADHD," I remind them over and again. "You can change that behavior by
implementing certain strategies." The goal is that they stop blaming
themselves. By stepping back and looking objectively at what they are
doing, they can identify the ADHD source of their behavior and initiate
necessary change. I've seen how a coach can instill hope in the client
who, left alone with years of negative voices playing inside the head,
might readily give up in the face of tasks that seem overwhelming. I've
also seen how that hope can be a catalyst for action. COACHING HELPS YOU
STAY MOTIVATED

People with ADHD are often judged as lacking in motivation, but a coach
can help change the self-image perpetuating that myth. I like to remind
my clients of the gains they have made, and I've seen how that kind of
encouragement can bolster their self-confidence. They can allow
themselves to feel good when I affirm their success, which then gives
them increased motivation to follow through on systems they know are
working. There's nothing like success to breed more success! COACHING
HELPS YOU SELF-INITIATE CHANGE

In order to function autonomously, we must be able to screen out
distractions, sustain attention, and use feedback appropriately, all of
which are chronic problems for many individuals with ADHD. To compensate
for these deficits, I help my clients observe themselves in action, a
necessary step in becoming aware of what they are doing while they are
actually doing it. Eventually, they develop the ability to take charge
of their behavior so they can act rather than react. For individuals
with ADHD, then, coaching can be the difference between minimal
functioning and true, full living. Clients can learn how to eliminate
the frustration they often feel from their ADHD by understanding their
own brains and adjusting their actions accordingly. In small increments,
they can begin to make significant changes, until they feel in control
of their ADHD symptoms. Ideally, they can learn to live more fulfilling,
satisfying lives.

One of the most powerful gifts my father gave me was the ability to
analyze. More specifically, he trained me to analyze my own actions and
behaviors, the ones that I was always repeating and that simultaneously
got me into trouble. Because this ability to analyze required skills of
observation, my father was training me at the same time to observe
myself in action---to become aware of what I was doing as I was doing
it---so I could answer the questions that he continually posed, the same
ones I later learned to ask of myself: "What can you do to prevent this
in the future?" "What strategies can you use?" "What can you anticipate
will get in your way?" "How will you know when you are getting off
track?"

I can certainly admit that it was no fun being accountable to my father
for my actions or lack of actions. It was no fun, either, trying to
self-manage during all those years without the benefit of knowing I was
struggling with ADHD. But the demands my father made on me and the
questions he had me asking myself are now the hallmark of my coaching
style. I like to think that I'm as dogged and caring with my clients as
he was with me and that the strong commitment I require from my clients
to themselves is no less than the one my father demanded of me. Let me
now ask you the question my friend asked me: Who are you, and can you
live the life you love? Coaching can help you consider how you want to
answer. It encourages you to look at your lifestyle, to think about the
choices you're making, and to live a life that's balanced and rich. It
essentially guides you toward taking control of how you're living so you
can actually love the way you live. Talking about her own life the other
day, a writer friend made an analogy to the coaching process. "Like the
garden tended or the marriage nurtured," she told me, "or like the life
lived with courage or the miles logged each week---none of it just
happens. But isn't it better to know that," she went on, "or where would
any of us fit in the picture of our own lives? When things work out the
way you want them to, you can call it luck or a gift or even grace, but
whatever you name it, you still have to use it to make it matter. You
have to act! And isn't that the point---that we choose how we're going
to live? That we exercise control?" Coaching can help you attain the
control that seems so elusive now, and it can help you maintain that
control once you begin to make it happen. Believe it, and you'll already
have begun! OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 2

How Coaching Works

When I was thirteen, I lived in Uganda, East Africa, where most of the
learning in the school I attended was hands-on. When our class hiked up
Mount Elgon on one of our many field trips, each of us was assigned a
guide who would hike up the mountain with us. The guides would not say
much, but they would help us carry our packs if we needed assistance or
provide direction and protection when necessary by pointing out slippery
spots, narrow ledges, or weak places in the bridges we had to cross. The
important thing was that our guides never carried us on their backs or
hiked for us. They simply stayed close by. As we learned more about what
to watch out for, our guides would fall a bit behind, letting us revel
in our newfound confidence and explore the paths by ourselves.
Essentially, the guides were doing what a coach does. A coach will help
you recognize and maneuver around the obstacles in your way, waiting
there in the shadows while you develop your own skills and strategies to
reach your goal. A coach will stay with you, but a coach will not walk
for you. Athletes, musicians, and business professionals have known the
value of coaching for years. They hire coaches to help them discover and
focus on what works for them so they can reach the goals they've set.
They recognize that the coaching partnership can make all the difference
between satisfactory performance and maximum performance, and those who
are tops in their respective fields have obviously opted for the latter.
I suppose it's easy to understand, then, how personal coaching has
become so widespread among the general population. Living in a culture
of

quick-fix expediency and instant gratification, and faced with
increasingly burdensome demands on their time and attention, people are
searching for ways to deal with the overload they feel while still
trying to make choices that fulfill and honor who they are. One problem
I've seen is that many don't really know who they are, and they don't
have any idea how to begin finding out. What I've learned as a coach is
that most people simply haven't thought about the kind of life they want
to live before they're caught up in living it. Somehow, they say,
they've landed in a job or a relationship or a situation without
understanding how they got there. "I feel lost," they tell me. "I just
don't know what I'm doing. How could this have happened?" Personal
coaching helps people focus on understanding their own needs, and it
teaches them to set goals for changing old behavior patterns and
creating new ones. In my role, I provide a supportive place from which
my clients can examine their lives as I ask them to consider, perhaps
for the very first time, that intriguing question that stunned me into
silence: Who are you? Even more, I permit them, perhaps also for the
first time, to consider the possibilities inherent in the answer. Most
of us, it seems, are so accustomed to the etiquette of putting ourselves
last, of not being or appearing selfabsorbed, that we feel guilty even
considering our own needs. It's selfish, we think. It's not loving or
kind or good. The personal coach asks you to change the focus and look
inward, not for its own sake, not to foster selfish behavior, but to
manage a life that too often feels out of control. Discovering
Strategies for Success In essence, I try to create a climate of support
and encouragement so my clients can discover for themselves how to
replace negative, defeating behaviors with positive patterns for
success. David, for example, had trouble paying bills on time, not
because he didn't have adequate funds in his checking account, but
because he thought he could write the checks one Saturday a month rather
than once a week. It would be easier, he insisted, to let all the bills
accumulate and to take care of them at one sitting. The problem was that
he was then left with an insurmountable pile, so he'd turn

toward biking or photography or anything else he considered a more
pleasurable activity than check writing, while his bills incurred late
charges. My job was not to agree with David's judgment that he was
"being irresponsible" and that he was "throwing money away." It was to
listen to what he thought was wrong, remind him of the importance of
paying his bills, and guide him toward how he wanted me to help him
remember the consequences of paying late---that he was being charged
extra money each month, money that could have been spent on better
things. Through our work together, he laid out a plan to address his
bills weekly and let me know how he wanted me to hold him accountable.
When I talked with David about how he wanted me to respond when he saw
that he wasn't following through, he realized that what he had initially
decided---that I should just excuse his lack of commitment and ask him
to try again the next week---wasn't working. After discussing different
approaches I might try in its place, he decided on a new strategy that
helped him accomplish the original task. He paid the bills on time and
as a bonus had all that former late charge money to use however he
wanted! This is the power of ADHD coaching. First you assess your most
pressing needs. Then you apply strategies to address them, fine-tuning
with the coach until you get the results you need and growing ever more
confident that they'll stick because you've come up with them yourself.
Having invested so much of yourself in the planning, after all, you
really want the plan to succeed, which is what motivates you to work
hard at making it happen. How ADHD Coaching Works Just as in any
coaching partnership, clients with ADHD have to be ready for the
experience and willing and able to meet the challenge of creating better
lives for themselves. What's different about clients with ADHD is the
reason they need a coach in the first place. Basically, ADHD coaching
focuses on the unique biological differences in the ADHD brain that have
caused the individual to have less control over his life than he wants
and needs to have. An ADHD coach understands the neurobiological
symptoms at the root of negative habits and behavior

patterns and, through this recognition, helps the client learn to
navigate the daily challenges caused by the symptoms. I explain to my
clients that the coaching experience is like a journey to learn more
about themselves and how ADHD plays a role in their lives. It's a
journey of self-discovery that helps them learn about their ADHD brain
and become more effective at home, at work, and at play. The very nature
of ADHD dictates that the brain's executive function--- its ability to
screen out distractions, to hold things in mind, to consider
consequences---is not working as well as it might. If you have ADHD, you
know from experience that planning ahead, prioritizing, and following
through on commitments are difficult. Simple tasks like paying the
bills, getting enough sleep, taking medication consistently, and
remembering to perform household chores can present as much difficulty
for you as longterm, more complex work projects might for people without
ADHD. You also know that making things stick is never easy. You've
probably struggled to develop new habits, but it wouldn't be surprising
if you've simply given up after repeated failed attempts. No one has to
tell you that you're disorganized or inconsistent, no matter how many
times you've sworn not to disappoint others or yourself. You know how
you are, and the fact that you're reading this book suggests that you're
as frustrated by your inability to follow through as other people in
your life probably are. You might have been asked "Why can't you just
keep a to-do list?" more times than you care to remember. Or, "Why can't
you just hang your keys on a hook so you won't lose them anymore?" On a
regular basis, my clients tell me how guilty and ashamed they feel, how
incompetent and helpless they believe they are. They promise to do
things differently, but then they find themselves repeating the old
patterns. "I'm so sick and tired of always turning over a new leaf,"
Sarah, a speech pathologist, cried to me recently. "Nothing seems to
work. It's like I'm stuck in the 'spin cycle' and can't seem to get out.
I just feel so stupid!" ADHD Is Not a Character Flaw Sarah's feelings of
inadequacy and frustration were understandable, but ADHD is not a
character flaw. It is a neurobiological disorder that she needed to
understand so that she could create strategies to address the

ADHD symptoms she was exhibiting and then do what was necessary to make
changes. Ridding herself of those negative feelings was certainly
possible, I assured her, but I emphasized that it was up to her to learn
as much as she could and then take the responsibility to adjust her life
accordingly. What Sarah could learn, for example, was that it's her ADHD
brain that makes her easily sidetracked, and it's her ADHD that makes
her do the same kinds of things over and over that she's consistently
promised not to repeat. In time, she could also learn that she's not
deliberately forgetting the consequences of prior actions and causing
herself repeated pain. She's forgetting because of differences in her
brain that cause her to forget. Once she was able to acknowledge that
fact, she'd be able to create strategies to bring about the changes she
was seeking. The same is true for you. Your ADHD won't go away, so you
need to understand it and plan for the ways it affects you. Coaching can
be helpful in bridging the gap between your desire to initiate an action
and your actually performing it and following it through. There's no
reason you have to let new commitments or challenges slip away with your
resolve. That old behavior pattern puts you at risk for losing hope and
giving up. You have to change the pattern. You have to create new
strategies to address what has traditionally left you overwhelmed. You
literally have to develop new habits that use the strengths of your ADHD
brain so that you can succeed. Remember, most of the time you certainly
know what you want to accomplish. Creative strategies that you initiate
and develop through coaching can actually help you do it. Fortunately,
exciting discoveries made by neuroscientists suggest that the brain is
flexible in its ability to learn continually. Rehearsing actions helps
to forge new neural pathways in the brain so it can develop competencies
in areas that historically have been deficient. This flexibility of the
brain, with its ability to adapt, is one way new habits are learned.
Because I've seen its results, I firmly believe that coaching
accomplishes two important things: It paves the pathway for this
learning to occur, and it makes a real difference in how people with
ADHD negotiate their particular deficits to cope with life on a daily
basis. They learn to selfinitiate change.

Understanding that the brain can learn provides the energy that should
help you make positive, lasting changes, as you turn an "I can't"
attitude into an "I can!" attitude. A coach can serve as your
cheerleader, helping you to build and maintain hope as you do the
difficult work of making the changes in your life that you know you
need. Precepts of ADHD Coaching A few years ago, one of my clients,
Connie, told me that our experience working together reminded her of
what she'd been striving to create for her children. Whenever she
thought about growing up, she still felt her own parents' disappointment
when she didn't follow through on her tasks, and she still heard the
sting of disapproval when they constantly demanded to know, "What's
wrong with you? Why didn't you finish your homework? How could you have
lost your assignment pad?" With her own children, Connie wanted to
create conditions where they wouldn't feel judged or threatened the way
she remembered feeling as a child. She was trying, in other words, to
address what they might be doing without judging who they were as
people. More than anything, she wanted them to be able to separate the
action from the person performing the act, so they could keep their
self-esteem intact. Working with my clients, I'm conscious of creating
conditions that let them succeed, and I try to offer a nonjudgmental
space for them to reflect on their behavior, so I was grateful that
Connie noticed the connection between what I was doing with her and what
she was doing with her children. Prodding as gently yet as persistently
as I can, I help my clients discover strategies for coping with the
demands of their daily lives. That relentless urging has earned me the
reputation of "Mother Teresa in army boots," but it's also garnered
successes for my clients that have changed their lives. The Importance
of Balance One of the most important things to understand is that
coaching is fundamentally holistic, which means that it involves working
on all aspects of your life. What you learn to understand is that
lifestyle choices matter.

What you eat, for example, or how much sleep you get has an effect on
your daily functioning. The strength of your social network or spiritual
life also affects your well-being, as does the level of satisfaction you
derive from your job. Working alongside a coach, you'll develop an
overall plan to address the multiple layers of your daily life by
compensating for the symptoms of ADHD that interfere with living fully.
I can't stress enough with my clients how allowing one aspect of life to
so dominate that it virtually excludes others---too much work, no
exercise, for example---almost guarantees less than maximum functioning.
Our mothers told us not to put all our eggs in one basket. Financial
advisers tell us to diversify. Guidance counselors tell high school
seniors that colleges are looking for well-rounded students. The
language might be different, but the message is the same. We are more
than our jobs, more than our circle of acquaintances, more than our
transcripts and résumés, more than the golf partners of our friends.
Each one of us is an individual with a unique mind and body and spirit
needing attention and care and respect. For most of us with ADHD, the
question is not "Do I believe this?" but "How do I consistently
translate that belief into consistent action?" In other words, "How do I
stop being consistently inconsistent?" I'm a runner, and I've completed
several marathons, but sometimes I'm still daunted by the idea of facing
more than twenty-six miles at once. Let's suppose that you wanted to
take up running yourself and that you thought running with me might help
you get started. Assuming that you were physically able to do so, I
certainly wouldn't invite you for a five-miler the first day. I'd let
you take a few beginning steps, though, I'd talk to you about a strategy
to increase how far you'd eventually be able to go, and I'd emphasize
the importance of the shorter distances that ultimately become the
longer ones. I'd break your runs down into segments you could manage,
and I'd add the miles gradually. In other words, I'd try to make sure
you remained undaunted by the task at hand by laying out a strategy you
could master. That thousand-mile journey really does begin with that
first, and most essential, step, but there's no magic in what happens
after that. It takes planning and effort and commitment to make it
happen.

Most of us have probably heard athletes and sports enthusiasts talk
about a particular sport as a metaphor for life itself. To be the best,
the athlete has to develop all aspects of his or her game. It might be
enough for a while to have the fastest serve or the purest jump shot,
but one perfect skill doesn't guarantee perfect overall functioning.
Coaches help athletes concentrate on the individual skills that combine
for a complete package. It's the same with ADHD coaching. A coach asks
you to consider your complete lifestyle and to develop strategies to
address all areas that need work. But because the notion of balance
matters, the coach provides support as you carry out the plan to achieve
your goals, one single, essential step at a time. Since individuals with
ADHD often try to do everything at the same time, this coaching approach
is important so that success remains within reach. ADHD coaches
understand that setting the goals too high by trying to accomplish
everything at once---which is also characteristic of the ADHD
brain---sets clients up for failure by sabotaging their efforts to
succeed. The Importance of Readiness Naturally, the question arises
whether coaching can actually benefit everyone coping with ADHD.
Experience has taught me that the answer lies in a potential client's
readiness. Coaching presumes, for example, that clients are healthy,
that they have an idea of what their issues are, and that they are ready
to devote the time to work on them, needing the coach only to draw them
out. Because coaching is a process of exploration that takes place over
a period of time, much of your success will rest on your readiness to
commit both time and spirit to the endeavor. "But how will I know I'm
ready?" you might ask. The answer isn't difficult. You'll know you're
ready for coaching when you can admit that you have a problem, when you
agree to spend the time necessary to create strategies to improve your
behavior, and when you are willing to adhere to those strategies to the
best of your ability. When you want to change, and when you agree to
work hard at what's necessary, as long and as difficult a process as
that might be, you're ready to begin. It's that simple.

But it's also a leap of faith. You have to believe in the possibility of
change and make a commitment to seeing it through! The ADHD Coaching
Model The possibility, even likelihood, of setbacks is inherent in any
long-term process, so I have to provide encouragement, recommendations,
feedback, and practical techniques to get my clients through the
challenging times. A coach will help you develop strategies to address
issues such as managing time, eliminating clutter in your home or
office, and becoming more effective, and thereby happier, both
professionally and personally. As a coach, I can see my clients'
problems within the context of their daily lives, and I indicate to them
where they're likely to have trouble. But why these things happen is not
our issue. I don't get into the psychological baggage they might be
carrying from years ago but concentrate instead on the present and
future. The question is, "What can you do about it?" or, "How can you
motivate yourself to act toward your goal?" or, "When is your deadline?"
I focus, in other words, on what, how, and when, questions designed to
help my clients compensate for their ADHD problems by creating
strategies that work for them. I concentrate on the practical details
they need to address, daily. As coach, I guide the process, I provide
structure, I ask questions, and I make observations. But I do not judge
or impose. If coaching is going to work, it's up to the client to drive
the process forward. Core Elements of Coaching PARTNERSHIP

By working in partnership with the coach, you determine not only exactly
what you need from coaching, but also how you'll get it. Your job is to
tell the coach the areas in which you need help and then set the ground
rules of the partnership so you'll succeed. David, you remember, wanted
to take control of his finances so he'd not only improve his credit
rating, he'd also have more discretionary money available by eliminating
late charges. He decided to pay his bills weekly, and he instructed me
on how to keep him on task. What's important in this process is that by
telling me how he

wanted to be accountable for reaching his goals, he ultimately assumed
responsibility for attaining them himself. You can enjoy a similar
success. As you define and then redefine your goals, the coach will help
you shape your interaction in a way that will work most effectively for
your needs, all the while factoring in practical considerations that
will allow you to succeed. Over time, and with your coach's assistance,
you should understand more about what actually motivates you and more
about what gets in your way. The point, of course, is that the balance
in the partnership eventually can shift from the coach's external
reminder to your own internal voice. Ultimately, it will be that
internal voice that will allow you to self-initiate change. Armed with
the ability to understand both what you need to do and how you can
accomplish it, you'll permit your coach to retreat further and further
to the background until you can function on your own. STRUCTURE

Within the coaching partnership, structure is one of the most vital
elements, but it is also one of the most difficult for many people to
accept. If you're like most of my clients, you probably have that
proverbial love/hate relationship with structure. On the one hand, you
feel constricted by schedules and structures that require you to perform
tasks that you don't like doing. On the other hand, it's usually
structure itself that makes you successful at completing those tasks,
making them less threatening or unpalatable to begin with. Working
together, you and your coach will try to understand your learning style
so you can develop tools that match your strengths. The goal is for you
to build structures that suit your particular style, structures that
work with your strengths and not against them. Maybe you don't need to
lay out all your clothes the night before you'll wear them, for example,
or write your whole week's shopping list in one sitting, as is necessary
for somebody else. The key is to recognize the kind of structure that
works for your personality and unique style and then to put that
structure in place. Structure is designed to improve your focus by
taking you through the steps of attending to details, planning,
organizing, and prioritizing for your goals. Structure is absolutely
necessary in order to move forward, for without it, there's more than a
good chance that you'll become distracted by

your environment, opt for immediate gratification, and get off track.
That's why the strategy has to work with your own style and preference.
Once he decided that paying his bills weekly was absolutely necessary,
for example, David also saw that he was choosing the wrong day to do it.
By nature he was someone who loved being outdoors. Of course he wanted
to ride his bike rather than pay his bills on a clear and sunny
Saturday! Under the same circumstances, people without ADHD might find
it difficult enough to resist the pull of clean air and open road, but
for those coping with ADHD, it might be impossible to stay focused on
paying the bills. David and others like him could easily forget the
importance of the goal because it lacked "immediacy." Since not
incurring late charges and having more money at the end of the month
would not affect the specific moment in which they were living, they
would be far more likely to turn to the reward of what they could grasp
right then and there---in David's case, pedaling through a perfect
afternoon. Establishing structures, ones particularly suited to you,
reinforces the successful behaviors and keeps you from straying off
course. The idea is that the routines you establish make it possible for
you to focus on what needs to be done to reach your goals. The more
success you have, the more you'll be inclined to stick with what you're
doing, widening your vision about what's possible for you to achieve. We
all find it easier to face tasks we enjoy and that we're good at, or at
least ones we know we're capable of completing. In other words, coaching
helps you lengthen your "I can!" list. As you begin to experience a
sense of ownership---of being in charge of your own life---you'll become
more motivated to move the experience forward. The more success you
have, the more you'll want to have! PROCESS

The third important principle of coaching is to help you develop an
ability to look inward, identify needs, and articulate a solution to the
perceived problems. By listening carefully and remaining emotionally
detached, I pose questions in as nonjudgmental a way as possible,
avoiding, for example, "Why didn't you do that?" and asking instead,
"What prevented you from doing that? What choices might you have next
time?"

I never asked David, "How could you have put off those bills again? Why
can't I trust you to follow through?" Instead I asked him, "What did you
do instead of writing those checks?" By slowing down and listing
activities that he had chosen instead of paying his bills, David
recognized how he had been creating his own problem by choosing an
unrealistic time to accomplish his task. He acknowledged how much biking
on weekends meant to him and admitted that he didn't want to surrender
that time to something he could just as easily do on a night during the
week. By realizing that he was working against himself, he could
establish a new routine to get the job done. Words matter. They matter
more than most people acknowledge, and for the coach, they can make all
the difference in the client's success. I said earlier that my siblings
and friends often heard my father's comments as criticism, but I had
somehow escaped that emotional response and could zero in on the point
of what my father was saying. I don't take any chances with my clients,
so I'm careful to choose language that lets them concentrate on specific
actions and solutions rather than on feeling guilty or irresponsible. By
modeling objective, nonthreatening language, I'm also teaching my
clients how to use it on their own. Eventually, instead of thinking,
"I'm such a jerk. I don't do anything right. I can't even pay my bills!"
David was able to realize, "I pay the bills late because I get
distracted and forget the consequences of not paying them, and I let
them pile up. I need to pay them once a week. I don't want to do them on
Saturday when I could be biking. I can leave a note on my desk every
Monday morning to remind me to write the checks Monday night. I can set
the alarm on my desk to go off at 10:00 p.m. to remind me again just in
case I've forgotten." When the focus is on solving the problem---when
the discussion between you and the coach is on creating solutions rather
than exploring or assigning blame---you can eventually internalize the
questions and be able to process what you're doing independently. For
you to succeed, you have to believe that you can succeed. Because many
people with ADHD have been misunderstood and labeled "stupid," learning
to reframe their disability can make all the difference in their daily
functioning. By separating yourself from the negative scripts that hold
you back, you can begin to look at yourself more objectively.

That's the point of coaching: Through guided self-exploration, you
designate your own problem areas, and you come up with your own
solutions. You empower yourself by taking ownership and control of your
actions. What Clients Say Many people with ADHD appear to have it all
together at work but fall apart when it comes to basic tasks at home.
The career woman in top form at the office often feels as if she's
leading a double life, accomplishing important things at the law firm
but collapsing with guilt and frustration at the laundry pile growing at
home. Fortunately, no one has to accept life on those terms. Coaching
can provide a different way. I don't pretend that it's easy, but I
definitely contend that it's worth the work. I know that my clients
agree. "Coaching offers something new to me, something I cannot really
describe," one woman wrote about her experience. "But I had no idea how
painful the process was going to be, or how rewarding. One of the first
things I discovered, common among women with ADHD, is that I always had
too much on my agenda for any given time period. I also had no clue how
to prioritize. Whatever was most pressing at the moment, or perhaps most
interesting, or required the least mental effort, was next on my agenda.
I spent a lot of time giving in to the overwhelmed feeling this method
of getting through the day gave me. "The coach's questions are always
designed to get me moving, and they're not at all threatening, but they
never feel quite like rewards. When she asks, 'How are you going to get
that done?' or, 'When are you going to have that completed by?' the pain
I'm already feeling only gets worse. I sometimes ask myself, 'Who in
their right mind would pay for this torture?' In the very next thought,
though, I am always grateful that I have found someone who can get me
from point A to point B without judgment and with incredible patience."
That's how ADHD coaching goes, really. It's pain and it's progress. It's
forward, it's back, then it's forward again. It's the challenge and it's
the reward, at once.

Many individuals with ADHD live in turmoil. It doesn't have to be that
way. Remember that you have choices. Imagine how things can change. By
using ADHD strategies that you create, and by learning to organize,
plan, and prioritize, you'll clear the hurdles of daily living with a
confidence and success you might never before have dreamed possible. My
clients have done it. Now it's your turn to say, "I can!" OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 3

Self-Coaching

You might say that I coach what I know, having lived it, and that I'm
putting my insights to work. The fact that I can offer you this book,
especially the promise that it holds for you, is based directly on my
experience with ADHD, personally and professionally. I am telling you
what I know to be true, which makes it easier for me to ask you to trust
the coaching process. Scan the television offerings or look around any
bookstore. Self-help programs and books abound, but if what they suggest
were impossible to achieve, no one would watch or read what is
available. The truth is you can help yourself. With the right
commitment, you can take responsibility for your life and coach yourself
toward change and control. Joseph, a recent client, revealed a common
reason people seek out coaching. His inability to fulfill his
responsibilities at home had been creating inordinate amounts of stress
for his family. "My wife says she's tired of having to do everything for
me," Joseph said. "She's fed up because I'm always asking her where
things are or when we're supposed to do something. She says I need to
learn some self-discipline about taking responsibility for things on my
own." It wasn't exactly an ultimatum that had been rendered by his wife,
but Joseph knew he wasn't going to change without help. Allan, another
client, came to me because of a problem at work. A business partner had
made it abundantly clear that Allan needed to manage time more
efficiently or risk losing his share in the business. For both clients,
and for many men and women like them, an element of desperation lay
behind their initial inquiry.

They were searching for control over problems that interfered with their
relationships and livelihood. They sought the help of a coach because
somebody important had made clear what was at stake if they didn't.
There are many reasons you might have picked up this book. You may have
simply felt ready to take charge of your life, rather than responding to
pressure from other people. Perhaps you're aware that there are problems
in key areas of your life, but you haven't been able to figure out
exactly what's wrong. Perhaps you're not even sure you have ADHD, but
because you know you're not functioning as well as you want to, you
sense that something within is throwing you off course. Maybe you think
this book can help you understand what that is and that you can learn,
at last, what to do about it. Or maybe you've been diagnosed with ADHD,
and now you want to learn to compensate for your symptoms by reading
about what has worked for others. There's even the possibility that you
have been coached before and are now looking for reminders about staying
on track. Whatever the reason you decided to read, there are lessons in
selfcoaching that you can learn. The basic premise behind coaching and
selfcoaching is the same, after all, so the real difference will come
down to the person to whom you'll be accountable. Obviously, success
comes from commitment, and you have to be honest with yourself about
keeping that commitment. Adults with ADHD often have a long history of
selfdeception, so you have to recognize from the outset that it's
probably easier for you than for an objective outsider like a coach to
excuse minimal effort. But if you hold yourself to the highest
standards, the kind to which I learned to hold myself, then being your
own coach is not only possible, it's well worth the effort involved.
First Things First Adults with ADHD typically answer "yes" to certain
questions about their behavior patterns. Obviously, many people exhibit
some of these behaviors some of the time, but that doesn't necessarily
mean that they have ADHD. The number of symptoms, the frequency of those
symptoms, and the severity of those symptoms all become factors in the
diagnosis of ADHD. The important thing for you to understand is that you
should not attempt to diagnose yourself. The following questions are
meant as a guide:

• Do you frequently feel stuck, unable to "get your act together," or
unable to meet your goals? • Do you find yourself with too many projects
at once, so many that you can't follow through with any of them? • Are
you easily distracted or unable to focus? • Is it difficult for you to
get organized? • Do you frequently procrastinate, resisting the idea of
beginning your work? • Are you frequently impulsive? • Do you frequently
speak without thinking about the consequences of your words? • Do you
forget the consequences of past actions, thereby repeating mistakes? •
Do you have problems with self-acceptance and self-esteem? • Are you too
easily bored, too easily attracted to some new stimulus? • Do you
frequently begin projects enthusiastically, only to lose interest?

If you answered "yes" to most of these questions, you should get an
actual diagnosis to make sure that other factors are not also at work.
Many people with ADHD struggle with significant emotional issues, which
should not be downplayed or ignored. A diagnosis might reveal that
therapy or medication is also warranted, and if you ignore that aspect
of your struggles, you could sabotage even your best efforts at coaching
yourself. (See medication table, page 232.)

SEEKING A DIAGNOSIS FOR ADULT ADHD

by John J. Ratey, M.D. NOTE: YOU SHOULD NEVER SELF-DIAGNOSE FOR ADHD If
you have been troubled by the following symptoms throughout your life,
and if the symptoms are severe enough that they interfere with your
daily activities and relationships, then you should visit a professional
who has experience in this area: a psychiatrist, psychologist,
experienced family practitioner, or other medical professional known to
be expert. COMMON SYMPTOMS OF ADULT ADHD Persistent symptoms of the
following are often found in adult ADHD: Trouble starting and finishing
projects Trouble organizing steps in a project, paper, letter, home,
office Trouble with memory---worry about Alzheimer's since the teen
years; misplacing things, pirouette sign (coming back and back again for
something you forgot)

World-class procrastination Internal feeling of being antsy, squirming,
restless legs syndrome all throughout body Difficulty focusing, paying
attention during a conversation, attending lecture, watching movie, or
reading a book Impatient to a fault; finishing people's sentences for
them, drawing rapid conclusions, or breaking into conversations;
episodes of road rage or extreme temper Distractibility, spacing out
Before visiting a medical professional, it is helpful to outline on
paper your history of attention problems, dating from childhood,
including the following: 1. School performance, relationship issues, job
history 2. Problems with authority, paying attention, nicknames like
Spacecase, Whirling Dervish, or Interplanet Janet 3. Your own and your
family's history of ADHD, depression, substance abuse, anxiety

But assuming that you're emotionally and physically able to act as your
own coach---that you are ready, willing, and able to meet the
challenge---let me give you an idea of what it will take. The Little
Black Book One of my best teachers required that each of us in his class
keep a journal, which most of us vehemently resisted at first but which
we later came to appreciate. "It will help you remember who you were,"
he used to tell us, and as with most other things he said, he was right
about the power of that notebook to capture the past. To this day, one
look at its soft, familiar cover and frayed edges brings every teenage
embarrassment painfully to life! Now I want you to get a notebook of
your own, not to spill onto its pages the yearnings of a restless heart,
but to organize in a practical way those goals you hope to attain and
the strategies you'll devise to get you there. As long as you can chart
your progress and setbacks---as long as you can observe yourself along
this self-coaching journey---any type of notebook or journal will be
fine, but a three-ring binder has the advantage of letting you add pages
and/or move them from one section to another.

You can begin the notebook by adapting a worksheet I ask my clients to
complete when we begin our coaching process. And because no "right" or
"wrong" answers to the questions exist, you should be as honest as
possible in answering them. They're not meant as a judgment. They're
meant as a guide, a way to get a picture of who you are and how you're
living now, right at this moment. If you have trouble answering, try
reading the questions out loud or taking a short break and coming back
to them later. Don't overanalyze anything. Simply write what comes to
mind.

COACHING GOALS AND ABILITIES WORKSHEET

1.  PROFESSIONAL LIFE Am I in the job or profession for which my
    education prepared me? (Am I doing what I was trained to do?)

If not, why?

What does it mean to me to have---or have not---taken the path for which
I prepared?

What do I do well in my job?

What specific parts of my job do I actually enjoy?

What problems do I experience in my job?

Would I choose this job again if I were starting over?

How much of my job do I have to "bring home"?

What words best describe how I feel when I think about my job?

2.  PHYSICAL HEALTH How much sleep do I generally get?

When I wake up, do I feel rested?

Do I eat three meals a day regularly?

Do I limit calories, fat, sodium, and the like in my food?

Is my weight under control?

What medications do I regularly take?

Do I exercise on a regular basis?

Do I limit my alcohol consumption?

Have I stopped smoking? (Or have I never started?)

Am I happy with the state of my present physical health?

3.  SOCIAL LIFE How often do I see my friends?

Do my friends and acquaintances "lift me up," or do they "drag me down"?

How often do I have fun?

What do I enjoy doing beyond work?

4.  SPIRITUAL LIFE AND SENSE OF WELL-BEING How important to me is being
    part of a religious community like a church or synagogue?

Is being spiritual, rather than religious, important to me?

How often do I pray or meditate?

When do I feel most at peace?

What makes me feel a sense of gratitude?

What makes me feel fulfilled?

What stressors are present in my life?

Who are the people in my support network?

How often do I interact with those in my support network?

What do I do for myself only?

What do I value most in life?

What do I do to honor those values?

5.  FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS How often do I worry about money?

Have I saved enough for emergencies?

Do I have long-term investments?

Do I have adequate health/home/life insurance?

Am I living within my means?

How do I generally regard the concept of debt?

What do I consider important enough to incur debt for?

How manageable is my current debt?

How financially secure do I feel?

6.  HOME LIFE What quality time am I spending with my spouse or partner?

Is that time sufficient?

What quality time am I spending with my children?

Is it enough?

How important are my individual needs to my family?

How am I handling my share of family responsibilities?

How do I feel about the area where I live?

How does my home reflect who I am?

Read over the responses you gave to these questions. Take enough time to
think about what you wrote. What profile of you emerges? With that
picture in mind, it's time to answer a few more questions: 1. IN WHICH
AREAS OF MY LIFE DO I APPEAR MOST IN CONTROL? 2. IN WHICH AREAS DO I
APPEAR MOST SATISFIED OR CONTENT? 3. IN WHICH AREAS DO I APPEAR TO BE
STRUGGLING? 4. ARE THERE ANY AREAS WHERE I APPEAR UNFULFILLED?

Before reading any further, think back to what I said earlier in the
book about the importance of balance in a person's life. Coaching, I
remind you,

is holistic. It seeks to address all areas of a client's life and to
guide the client toward balance. Now it's time for you to answer several
more questions, all based on what you have already indicated about the
way you're living: 1. WHAT ARE SOME KEY AREAS IN MY LIFE THAT I WANT TO
IMPROVE? (Health? Finances? Professional development? Home life? Social
life? Spiritual life?) 2. WHAT ARE SEVERAL OF MY SHORT-TERM GOALS? Where
do I want to be in one month? Three months? Six months? What do I have
to do daily to get there? What things do I want to work on now? 3. WHAT
ARE MY LONG-TERM GOALS? 4. HOW DO MY GOALS REFLECT WHAT I SAY I VALUE
MOST? (Before answering, refer back to the section on spiritual life and
sense of well-being, page 38.) 5. WHAT MUST I DO---WHAT CHANGES WILL I
HAVE TO MAKE---IN ORDER TO LIVE ACCORDING TO MY VALUES?

Reading the information you provided and assessing the overall sense of
how you're living might have surprised you, or it might have upset or
disconcerted you. It's important to have thought about all these aspects
of your life, though, because it will help you later as you construct a
plan for acting as your own coach. To facilitate your coaching, and
especially to help you begin, you must keep your notebook in a safe,
convenient place where you'll have ready access to it. It will become
your constant reference through the process of self-coaching. It's where
you'll write down your goals, note your progress and setbacks, and
clarify your thinking. It's really the proof, the confirmation, of where
you have been and where you are headed. It's the truth that stands up
boldly to the self-delusion so many of us practice. In its own way, the
notebook that you keep can be the best accountability partner you'll
ever know. If you're honest about what you put into it, it will be
unrelenting in its honesty in return. "I feel like a

schoolboy again, always carrying my notebook around," a client told me
recently. "But I'd be lost without it. It's like my old friend Jack from
high school, the one who kept me on the straight and narrow. My folks
used to say that Jack was the one who kept me honest." The notebook will
also be demanding, especially of the attention it deserves. No matter
how difficult the notion of writing in it might seem now, you'll need to
commit to it if you're going to succeed, which means developing a new
habit, or ritual, of record keeping. Make it easy on yourself by
eliminating potential problems before they begin: Keep the notebook
visible, keep it in the same place, keep a pen right next to it, set a
specific time to update it, post reminders to yourself that it's waiting
for you! Treat your notebook like a friend or trusted ally who wants
only the best for you, and it will reward you in ways you can actually
document. On the other hand, in this era of technology, a notebook might
not work for you. George, a former client, prefers electronic devices,
so he uses his computer to record his goals and successes and setbacks,
and he returns to his file daily. He also relies heavily on his PDA.
"For me, the PDA is a godsend," he told me after we'd worked together
for a while. "I can keep track of things, dates, times, phone numbers,
account information, passwords---everything, really---better than my
wife, the walking calendar. It's like an extension of my brain." Each
person has to develop the tools and strategies that work individually,
so think about your own needs and tendencies, the most comfortable ways
you know of keeping track of things. The important thing is that you own
the system you create or you won't stick with it. As George put it,
"Whatever ways fit your individual style, you need to maintain them like
they're a life-support system." Choose what works for you and stick to
it. Just promise yourself to use your notebook or your computer file or
whatever other electronic device you decide on. The goal is to keep
track of what you want to accomplish, whatever way you choose to do
that. How to Self-Coach Just as partnership, structure, and process are
the core elements of my coaching model, they will be the fundamentals of
your self-coaching. And

the goal will be developing the ability to self-initiate change.
PARTNERSHIP

Self-coaching requires that you learn as much as you can about your own
neurobiology. You need to partner with your brain to exploit your
strengths and overcome your weaknesses. Essentially, you need to take
control and acknowledge---truly understand---that your ADHD brain is
part of who you are and that you can control that part. But you should
also create outside accountability partners, trusted advisers with whom
you can touch base and who are willing and able to commit to you. Again,
because it's usually easier for others to see us than it is to see
ourselves, it's important to select people who will be nonjudgmental as
well as objective. These partnerships will help guide and direct you
when you get off course. STRUCTURE

I know that structure is inherently difficult for people with ADHD, but
to self-coach on this journey, you must put boundaries, or structures,
in place for your ADHD brain to follow. That's a central paradox in the
concept of coaching. The very structure that an ADHD brain resists is
the actual means to harnessing that brain, to making it work for you. As
one of my clients put it, "Coaching is very structured, which is hard
for me, but that's why I requested help in the first place---my lack of
structure!" But once again, you have to be honest about building those
essential structures, even as you resist the urge to abandon them when
you think they've become too challenging. If you keep your commitment to
effect a change in your life, structures will help you develop the new
habits that eventually become your instinctive ways to cope. PROCESS

Change takes time. It also involves setbacks, but in the coaching
process, there's a good reason why. The individualized approach that
fosters individual success means that generic structures and strategies
won't work. Much of the time, you'll be engaged in trial and error as
you try to determine which approaches will be effective, but trial and
error is part of

what you should expect as you discover the strategies that work in your
particular life. Be aware that to succeed, you'll need to keep up a
constant dialogue with yourself as you build and then modify or possibly
eliminate strategies that aren't working. That's where your notebook or
computer file can help. If you find yourself not following through on
one of your strategies, for example, slow yourself down and list the
actions you actually took instead of the actions detailed in your
strategy. Use your notes to question yourself the way I questioned David
when he wasn't paying his bills once a week as he had planned. Your
answer to "What did I do instead?" might reveal that you need to change
your strategy and devise a plan that will work with your strengths and
interests, not against them. That kind of objective awareness---an
actual written record---of what is holding you back, rather than a mere
feeling of helplessness, is exactly what can help you take control of
your actions and effect the changes you desire. It's worth noting that
the notebook or file will also reflect your progress and the strategies
that have been working, which can remind you, when necessary, to hold
resolutely to your goals. Understanding from the outset that coaching is
a journey---that it's a process, the antithesis of instant
gratification---can help you adhere to your commitment to take control
of your life, even during those inevitable moments of frustration when
you're tempted to turn away. Nobody will deny that it's easy to get down
on yourself when you aren't making the progress you've envisioned. It's
understandable, especially initially, to revert to the old ways of
thinking and want to "pack it in and accept that you're a loser," as one
of my clients said recently. But remember that you must separate the
action from the person performing the action so you can move past blame
and discouragement and into positive action. Coaching works when it has
been given the time to work, so promise yourself to stay with it!
DECISION TIME Consider the following questions to determine if you're
ready to try self-coaching: • Am I willing to let go of old patterns and
habits in order to replace them with new ones?

• Am I able to identify at least one or two things I would like to
change? • Am I flexible enough to try new approaches to old ways of
doing things? • Am I willing to put the time and energy into the
self-coaching process to get the results I want? • Am I willing to be
honest with myself in terms of what my effort level really is, rather
than what I wish it would be at any given point? • Do I have the courage
to ask help from others?

The more times you answered "yes" to these questions, the more ready you
are to try self-coaching. But there's a good chance you now have a
question of your own, the same question almost every client asks: "How
do I do it?" Fortunately, I've devised a way to answer that question,
which you'll discover when you turn to chapter 4. First, though, let's
review what you can gain. THE BENEFITS OF COACHING 1. Identifying your
specific strengths and weaknesses 2. Setting realistic goals 3. Learning
to prioritize 4. Creating necessary structures so you can stay on track
to meet deadlines 5. Using strategies without giving up; becoming more
resilient 6. Improving organizational and time management skills 7.
Self-motivating by means of your "internal dialogue" and
self-observation 8. Learning productive ways in which to handle the
details of your daily life 9. Improving personal habits, such as
exercise and nutrition 10. Developing an assertive outlook to advocate
and get the support you need 11. Communicating more effectively with
those around you 12. Setting up a more efficient environment to meet
your needs

Can you do it? You won't know until you try, so I urge you to make the
effort. It won't necessarily be easy, and I can't guarantee you'll
succeed, but I can guarantee that if you make a serious effort, you'll
learn something about how your ADHD brain operates. You'll also learn
much more about yourself as an individual, about who you are and how you
are living, about the goals you're willing to strive for and the
compromises you're willing, and unwilling, to make.

COACHING AND THERAPY (See Appendix B for ways to locate an ADHD coach.)

by John J. Ratey, M.D. Whether you decide to work with an ADHD coach or
self-coach, it should be clear from the start that coaching is not a
substitute for therapy or any other services that may be beneficial to
you. In fact, the collaborative efforts of coaching and therapy can
often produce the best results. It should also be very clear that
coaching or selfcoaching is not a substitute for medication. The
combination of medication prescribed by a physician familiar with ADHD,
along with therapy and coaching, or self-coaching, can serve as a
multifaceted approach to improving the quality of life for someone with
ADHD.

And with the power that this new knowledge brings, you can absolutely
change the way you live into living in a way you love. You might even
repeat what Gary, a former client, told me not too long ago: "I am who I
am today because of it. Coaching literally changed my life." Now it's
your turn to turn around your life. You really are the only person who
can change it, but let me help you begin. Let me give you the answer!
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 4

Finding the A-N-S-W-E-R

To help you make the changes you want, I've developed a strategic tool I
call the A-N-S-W-E-R. The A-N-S-W-E-R is the practical guide to coaching
yourself. It helps you move past the shame and incompetence your ADHD
often makes you feel and into the self-understanding and acceptance that
everyone needs in order to live a full life. By following its process,
you can effectively begin to take control of your challenges, using
strength-based strategies that you devise yourself to address them. As
you already know, wishing and hoping will never be enough to change you
or get you where you want to be. If you truly want to make a change in
your life, you have to do something---two things, really: First you need
to make a plan, and then you need to make an effort to follow that plan.
But don't just forge ahead blindly, as you might be tempted to do.
Instead, as you consider a plan to change your life into one that
fulfills you, one that you actually love living, I want you to be guided
by those principles and ideas that you yourself listed on your Coaching
Goals and Abilities Worksheet (see page 36). Look back at number 4,
"Spiritual Life and Sense of Well-Being." You listed there what you
value most in life and what you currently do to honor those values. A
little later you stated what you have to change in order to live a life
based on those values. Before you read any further, turn to a clean page
in your notebook or computer file and title it "Mission Statement,"
which is a promise to

yourself that every change you attempt to make will be shaped by those
principles or ideals that you hold inviolate, those values that you are
no longer willing to compromise. Remember: If you are going to live a
life that reflects what you hold sacred---a life that reflects your core
values---you need to know what that actually means. If you can't put it
into words, then you might not have thought about it enough. Take the
time to think right now, and when you are ready, write it clearly and
unequivocally under the "Mission Statement" heading on your page. To
help you begin thinking about your own, let me give you two examples.
One client had been growing increasingly frustrated by the many demands
on his time and energy that were leaving him unfulfilled. He felt
physically exhausted, he said, and emotionally depleted, but he was
beginning to understand that he could not keep meeting everyone else's
needs if he did not also meet at least a few of his own. He wrote as his
mission statement, "I will take care of my mind, body, and spirit, so
that I have the strength to take care of my family's needs." He would
base future decisions, he said, on how well they would honor that
statement. Another client was feeling guilty about her inability to be
the same model of perfection socially as she was professionally, and she
frequently found herself angry and short-tempered with friends and
acquaintances, who she believed were expecting too much of her. They, in
turn, found her inconsiderate and aloof when she turned down invitations
and didn't check in with them as often as they expected. In her mission
statement, she resolved, "I will live a more fulfilling life where I am
more accepting and forgiving of myself and others, and where I am also
honest with myself and others." People with ADHD can be more directed
when they have a clear vision of what they want to accomplish, so craft
a powerful mission statement that will help you adhere to your most
important values. Your mission statement needs to be anchored in your
brain, and you can best anchor it by verbalizing it. That's why you need
to articulate it. That's why you need to write it down. But don't just
walk away from it once you do. Review it daily. Say it out loud. Make it
your mantra. Engineer your environment so that you see it easily. In
addition to writing it in your notebook, stick it on your bulletin board
or affix it to your mirror. Create a screen saver with it. Do whatever
you must to keep that mission statement

at the forefront of your mind. Knowing and repeating what you truly
value will help you in every change you attempt to make. How the
A-N-S-W-E-R Works Each of you reading this book is at a particular place
in your life, so each of you is at a slightly different point along the
continuum of change. You might, for example, be further along than
others in acknowledging that you really do have ADHD struggles. You
might be well aware of your challenges but not actively developing
strategies to overcome them. Or you might have been working hard but
employing the wrong strategies for your specific personalities or
circumstances. Ultimately, each of you has to design an individual plan
to overcome your individual challenges. The word ANSWER is an acronym
for the six basic steps you'll need to follow as you begin to coach
yourself into control of your life. 1. Acknowledge and accept your ADHD
and associated challenges. 2. Narrow in on one or two issues on which
you initially want to work. 3. Strategize a plan of attack using
strength-based structures. 4. Work and follow the plan. 5. Evaluate your
progress on a regular basis to see what is working and what is not. 6.
Repeat the process so your guard does not let down.

You will use and customize the A-N-S-W-E-R to suit your own needs. A.
ACKNOWLEDGE AND ACCEPT YOUR ADHD

Since the first step to solving a problem is acknowledging that the
problem exists, you must acknowledge that you have ADHD, which means the
following: 1. Recognizing that ADHD is part of your daily life 2.
Understanding that it will not just go away 3. Learning as much as you
can about your particular deficits 4. Admitting that many of the
struggles and problems you experience are because of ADHD

Acknowledging your ADHD is meant as neither a crutch nor an excuse. It
is simply an acceptance that ADHD is a fact of your life, one you can,
and must, address. As one of my clients put it in his initial coaching
session, "If you concentrate on what is not working in your life, you
get stuck. You become a victim of this or that. I'm ready to move on
from that. I've realized that my ADHD will never go away. It will always
be with me. It's a matter of how I choose to deal with it. It's a
choice. I want to learn how to live life not as a victim." My client was
right. Although you certainly have no choice about the existence of your
ADHD, you absolutely do have a choice in what you can do about it. Step
one is acknowledging its role in your life as a condition you can
address. But in order to address your ADHD, you must first understand
it. Only then can you take the second important step in compensating for
your ADHD symptoms: creating an emotional distance between who you are
as a person and what you are doing because of your ADHD. As I've said
before, you must learn to separate the action from the person performing
the action. How much do you understand about ADHD? Do you know how and
why your ADHD affects the various areas of your life? Can you give
examples of your ADHD challenges? A critical self-evaluation is an
essential first step in self-coaching. Self-Evaluation

Using your notebook or computer file, label a clean page
"Self-Evaluation" and then make three columns on that page. Now write
"Symptom" at the top of the left column and "Outcome" at the top of the
right column. Leave the middle column blank, and we'll fill it in later.
The page should look like this: SELF-EVALUATION SYMPTOM

OUTCOME

To begin, list under "Symptom" one behavior or symptom of your ADHD, and
directly across from that, under "Outcome," name all the effects that
particular symptom has on your life, trying to be as specific as

possible. Then keep going, listing all symptoms and all effects in the
same manner. Take as long as you need, using as many pages as you need,
keeping in mind that in order to change your life, which is your general
goal, you have to be honest about the changes you need to make, which
are your specific goals. To help you get started, consider symptoms and
outcomes that many of my clients have listed in their own notebooks:
SELF-EVALUATION SYMPTOM

OUTCOME

Poor sense of time

Always late Accomplishes little Seen as undependable

Difficulty prioritizing

Often disappoints others Does work on wrong projects Avoids important
tasks

Acting before thinking; getting bored easily

Spotty employment history Can't maintain relationships Can't tolerate
boredom

Easily sidetracked from goal

Jumps from task to task Doesn't listen to others Misses deadlines

Inflexible; stuck in details

Can't let go Too controlling Easily agitated

Now chart your own symptoms and their impact on both you and those close
to you. If you have difficulty, or if you aren't sure of either your
negative behavior patterns or their effect on others, you might consider
asking someone else to look over your list. Sometimes objective
observers have a way of seeing us that we never have ourselves, and
sometimes we aren't aware of how our actions are affecting other people.
Making this list is the perfect time to ask the assistance of an
accountability partner. You want to begin your self-coaching journey in
as honest and open a way as possible, after all, so if someone can help
you take this first step, by all means try it. But I must stress again
what I have already said to you several times in this book and what I
find myself repeating over and over to my clients: Adults with ADHD are
usually masters in the art of self-deception. Accountability, to
yourself or others, works only in proportion to your individual honesty
about your ADHD. Consider what one former client revealed early on in
our coaching journey. "I got so good at hiding my inferiorities around
others that I can easily fool myself," he said. "Even during years of
football playing---and I was a high school all-star---no one could tell
that I hardly knew what a 'down' was, let alone what down it was at any
given point in the game. I'm so good at deception---hiding or sneaking
candy, bad grades, cigarettes---that I have mastered selfaccountability
deception." If you're going to serve as your own coach, you absolutely
cannot deceive yourself about your ADHD. You must be honest about how
your ADHD affects your life by taking the time to learn how your ADHD
brain operates. Once you understand the characteristics of ADHD, you
should see that ADHD is controlling much of your behavior. This ability
to step back and separate the person from the problem---this new
objectivity about your behavior---will help you move past self-blame and
toward the changes you've promised yourself you'll make. Acknowledging
your ADHD, then, means more than simply stating that you have it. It
means examining how you are acting because of ADHD and how your actions
are affecting others. It means consistently reminding yourself that ADHD
is a problem requiring your steady, unrelenting determination to address
its symptoms. IN THE A-N-S-W-E-R, ACKNOWLEDGMENT MEANS:

• Understanding that you have ADHD • Learning what that means in general
terms • Actively examining what it means in your own life • Separating
your ADHD from yourself (I have ADHD, not I am ADHD) • Moving past
self-blame • Taking responsibility for yourself • Taking action to
change your behavior patterns • Creating accountability with others, if
necessary N. NARROW THE FOCUS

"Looking at my goals, I can see that they're all over the map," a client
told me recently. "I need to edit and consolidate. I know my heart's
desire but don't know how to make it happen. Where do I begin?" Because
most ADHD adults voice the same frustration about their own goals and
challenges, you can probably relate to my client's plea for help. But
once you have separated yourself from your ADHD---once you acknowledge
that ADHD is a condition, it's not who I am---you should be able to
identify the key challenges it presents, focusing on two or three major
issues with which you most frequently struggle. You can narrow the focus
by referring back to the symptoms and outcomes you listed in
acknowledging your ADHD (see pages 53--54). Directly beneath your list,
write and complete the following statement: THE AREAS THAT CAUSE ME THE
MOST DIFFICULTY ARE

In your enthusiasm to get started, you probably want to make a change
for every symptom you've listed, but it's essential that you initially
address only one or two issues, preferably one. Earlier, you listed
several short-term goals that you wanted to work on. Go back and compare
what you wrote

then with the symptoms and outcomes you listed later. Can you select
from the lists one or two common symptoms with which to begin
self-coaching? Draw a circle around those symptoms, and complete the
following statements on a clean page: MY FIRST GOAL IS TO ADDRESS THE
FOLLOWING SYMPTOMS OR BEHAVIORS:

Then complete the following statement: I HOPE TO CHANGE THE FOLLOWING
SPECIFIC OUTCOMES:

If this seems like a modest beginning to your coaching journey, and that
selecting only one or two challenges rather than all the behaviors
keeping you from the balanced life I said was so important is a small
goal, it's for a good reason. I want you to succeed at self-coaching. I
don't want you to set up a losing proposition by trying to change too
many things at once. Do you remember what I said earlier about running?
Just as I wouldn't allow a novice to attempt a marathon on the first day
out, neither would I allow a new client to work on multiple challenges
at once, especially before fully understanding the ADHD causes behind
his or her actions. In either case, the likely outcome would be failure
and disappointment, possibly even refusal to try again. The client, like
the runner, would be overwhelmed by the enormity of the task. Who would
blame either one of them for thinking, "Never again!" Unfortunately, I'm
all too familiar with clients who set themselves up for failure. "This
is my last chance," they often think. "If I don't change everything at
once, it's not worth it." Even if they succeed at narrowing their goals,
they might lack an understanding of what each goal will take--- the
amount of time, for instance, or the effort involved to accomplish it.
They become so easily frustrated by effort and long-term commitment that
they give up before they give themselves a chance to succeed. My job as

coach is to remind them of narrowing the focus. As your own coach, you
have to remind yourself. The point is to master one goal at a time so
you can explore associated patterns and behaviors that normally prevent
you from attaining your goals. In this way, you can employ
countermeasures against those obstacles. My job as coach is to keep one
goal at a time in the forefront of my client's mind. That must be your
goal, too. If you give yourself permission to proceed slowly and
deliberately, you'll realize another benefit. Instead of simply changing
specific outcomes of your ADHD symptoms, you'll understand their causes
as well. This knowledge is important because once you identify patterns
of behavior, you can also identify triggers that lead you off course. To
succeed at selfcoaching, knowing what takes you off course is essential.
One of the most common deterrents for adults with ADHD in reaching their
goals is their inner saboteur---the negative tapes inside the head that
constantly remind them of past failures. But once you understand that
the actions you want to change occur because of your ADHD brain---again,
once you understand that you, the person, are separate from your
actions--- you can eliminate the blame and embarrassment and
discouragement you've suffered for years. Every time you focus on what
draws you away from your goal, you can then implement a strategy to
eliminate that obstacle, rather than repeating the negative tape that
tells you you're incompetent or irresponsible or hopeless. You can
actually develop those new habits and actions we have already agreed are
essential to success. Remember, you don't have to be a victim at the
mercy of an omnipotent force. You can choose to act against it.

In the A-N-S-W-E-R, Narrowing the Focus means: • Zeroing in on the
negative aspects of the specific behaviors • Navigating the traps and
distractions you repeatedly face • Selecting the one or two challenges
most negatively affecting your life • Eliminating the negative tapes
that can sabotage your efforts

One of my clients really enjoys the view from her creekfront deck. "I
love to look at the houses across the water and watch the people working
on

their boats or in their gardens," she told me not too long ago. "I can
see each one distinctly. I wish I could look at my goals that
way---individually and distinctly. With goals and challenges and my ADHD
behaviors, I feel like I'm looking at an ocean with no end in sight, not
a creek that gives me a view of the other side. I'm overwhelmed by the
vastness of what's in front of me." When she said that, I told her the
same thing my father told me when I asked him one day how he always
managed to stay focused when he obviously had to contend with so many
obligations to so many people in so many different aspects of his life.
He thought for a moment before reminding me of the camera he'd recently
bought for my mother, the one with the zoom lens. "Suppose you want to
take a picture of the backyard here," he said, "but you can't get
everything into one shot. Instead, you decide to feature the apple tree
in the corner, but even that tree is really too big, so now you zoom in
on a single branch, but even that isn't quite small enough, so you
finally choose one leaf, or one apple, and you zoom in really close and
take that particular picture. That's what I do when I have so many
things to think about. I zoom in. I narrow my focus." So there it is,
another part of the A-N-S-W-E-R. In my father's honor, I encourage you
to narrow the focus. Doing so will allow you to navigate the traps and
eliminate the negative tapes and consequences you have endured for far
too long. S. STRATEGIZE! STRATEGIZE AGAIN!

As I learned even before my official diagnosis of ADHD, I had to find
ways to compensate for the particular deficits that threatened to hold
me back. When I lived at home, my father took the lead for me. But once
I left home, I had to learn for myself how to strategize---how to create
a specific plan to address my specific ADHD challenges. Now you must do
the same. Frankly, it doesn't matter if your husband organizes his
clothing according to color or your wife exercises each morning exactly
two hours after coffee and the news. If that works for them, then let
them enjoy the rewards of what they've structured, but don't get caught
in the trap of assuming that their routines should be yours.

Unfortunate as it may initially appear, there are no prepackaged
strategies for success as you address your ADHD challenges. It might be
easy and it might be convenient if it were otherwise, but the simple
truth is this: Other people's routines can be useless or even
counterproductive for you, so you have to commit to the process of
creating your own. Fortunately, there's an upside. Not only do you get
to be creative, you also get to acknowledge and work to your strengths
along the way. As I discovered during my graduate school days at
Harvard, your strategies don't have to be driven by "I should." Don't
let that kind of thinking---"I should do such and such because everybody
else does"---set you up for failure the way it did me. Finding Your Own
Strategies

An assignment was due, and I was well aware that if I didn't sit down
and focus, I would never finish the work. I was desperate, but I was
proud, too. At last I had come up with a plan to keep myself seated and
finally complete the paper I had been writing---or not writing---for
more than a month. After spreading my books across the library table
where I had settled, I sat for a moment and smiled, confident at being
part of the serious population in this dark-paneled room I had so often
avoided. Today would be different, I knew. Then today would turn to
night, and still I would sit, still I would stay, still I would be in
this seat when the lights at last dimmed. Smiling at the perfection of
my plan, I removed the sweatshirt I had been wearing for the occasion
and, using its arms as a rope, carefully tied my own leg to the leg of
the mahogany table in front of me, secure in the knowledge that I would
not be wandering off. I would sit as long as it took, and I would finish
my work. Much to my dismay, the only reward for my trouble was that I
fell asleep. And when I woke, it was not to the perfectly penned paper I
had hoped to produce, but to panic at what I was sure was imminent
failure. Yet what a liberating lesson I learned in the Harvard library
that day! I discovered the fallacy in my thinking, the assumption that
my experience disproved. I assumed that if I did what everybody else was
doing, I would get the same results. I assumed that since all the other
students sat at a table in the library, I should sit there, too. I
assumed that if they did their work

sitting still for hours, that's how I should do my work; if that's how
they got their A's, that's how I should get my A's. I should sit still
at a table in the library, and I would complete my assignment. But I had
overlooked a major factor in the equation: I simply was not someone who
could sit still for long periods anywhere, much less in a silent
library. Once I admitted that to myself, I realized that my apartment
was actually a much better place for me to be. There, I could stand up
or walk around without bothering people; I could take a break and then
return to my work with better focus and resolve. And I discovered a
built-in bonus as well: My apartment could become spotless in the
process. Homework could be interspersed with housework, making neither
the endless and oppressive drudgery it had usually been. What a
liberating lesson, indeed, one I happily pass on to you now: There is no
"one size fits all" approach to strategies for persons with ADHD. You do
not bear the burden of assuming others' routines for yourself. Do what
works for you. Your brain is unique, so the way to accommodate yourself
will also be unique. That's the point. It's up to you to discover
strategies that work for you. Doing What Works for You

Katherine, one of my former clients, had left her position as a designer
in a large firm to work independently from an office in the fixer-upper
she and her husband had recently purchased. Driven by the happy labor of
renovating and decorating this dream-come-true cottage in the woods,
Katherine soon faced the improbable prospect of losing that dream when
her salary slipped considerably. Coaching helped her to realize that
instead of concentrating on work for which she would be compensated, she
had been spending an inordinate amount of time painting and wallpapering
her new home. Once she understood how her priorities had shifted to
another extreme---all work, no play had turned into all play, no
work---she made a contract with herself. Recognizing the need for
pursuing her avocation as well as her vocation, she decided to devote
one hour to her own redecorating only after devoting four hours to work
projects. The reward system worked. Katherine was soon earning the
salary she needed, and she still got to do what she loved. She used the
decorating as her "reward" and let that be the motivation to do her
"real" job. After all, if

she didn't make the necessary money, she couldn't keep paying for the
house and the countless ways in which it would finally become her own.
Another client, Steven, was a caseworker who had been struggling to
track his various cases. "I need to see all the cases," he told me. "I
have to lay everything out---their specifics, their relative importance,
their time frames---in the context of a full month. Otherwise, they get
all mixed up in my head and I can't remember which ones I should be
working on at any given time." After exploring several options, Steven
decided that what he really needed was a wall-size calendar, but because
he worked in an open office setting, he had been too embarrassed to
address his tracking problem "publicly." After a few sessions of my
relentless prodding, he decided to purchase a whiteboard with a monthly
calendar; he assigned each case a particular color and then began
tracking them on the calendar with Post-it notes to match.
Interestingly, the standing and moving required to physically track the
cases this way helped to stimulate his brain, which in turn kept him
more alert and less inclined to become confused. The benefits were so
immediate and so strong that, much to Steven's surprise, wall calendars
soon became part of the office decor. Seeing Your Strengths

Unlikely as it might seem, successful strategizing involves more than
acknowledging your weaknesses or deficits. It involves acknowledging
your strengths as well, which sounds like another paradox to many of my
clients. Accustomed to the negative tapes testifying to their
incompetence, adults with ADHD are often blind to their own talents and
gifts and unaware of how much they've actually accomplished. One former
client, an academic chairperson at a prestigious university, was plagued
by feelings of failure. Despite her long career in both teaching and
publishing, when I asked her to list her strengths, she could think of
little in her life of which she could be proud. "I still remember," she
told me, "how I couldn't complete one of my high school assignments. The
class was called Teenage Problems, and the teacher made us list all the
things we liked about ourselves and then all the things we didn't like.
I could only do the last list. I left the whole first column blank."

Too many adults with ADHD are so focused on what they can't do that they
forget the positive aspects of who they are and what they've managed to
achieve, their ADHD deficits notwithstanding. They think that if
something comes easily to them, there's only one of two reasons why:
Either they're doing it incorrectly, or it must come easily to everyone
else, too. Having spent their whole lives listening to criticism, they
don't even have language for their own success. Many have practiced for
so long covering up their weaknesses that they simply cannot acknowledge
that they do anything well. You have to change that thinking if you're
going to create successful strategies for your ADHD challenges, so let's
begin right now with a few questions I ask my clients in our initial
sessions. Before you answer, look back at your Coaching Goals and
Abilities Worksheet (page 36), which is a reflection of balance in
addressing the multiple layers of your life. In each section are
opportunities for you to consider ways in which you are functioning
well. Under "Professional Life," for example, if you're in the job for
which you were educated, then perhaps that's something for which you
should take credit. Once upon a time you chose to attend law school, for
example, and now you're an associate at a large firm near your home. Or
once upon a time you chose to earn a master's degree in business, and
now you head a company with markets overseas. In other words, you
fulfilled a long-term goal, so might that also indicate something
positive about your ability to prioritize or to see a plan through to
completion? Under "Physical Health," perhaps you noted that, yes, you
exercise regularly, and no, you no longer smoke. Might those choices
speak to your iron will or your ability to focus on the goal? Now read
through the worksheet carefully, as if the person it represents were not
you, but a job applicant for a position you're trying to fill. Let the
worksheet represent a stranger, someone you've never met. As you read,
underline every answer that indicates an asset or a measure of success.
Then complete the following statement: I CAN SEE THAT "THE APPLICANT"
HAS BEEN SUCCESSFUL AT:

You probably perceive the "anonymous" person on the worksheet as someone
with more than a few positive qualities and accomplishments. I know that
it's difficult to see yourself that way, but try to be objective. Read
through the worksheet again, taking time to think about how your answers
reflect your strengths. Then turn to a clean page in your notebook or
computer file and answer the following questions. Again, try to answer
truthfully, not according to "I should."

STRATEGIES WORKSHEET

What are my strengths?

What seems to come naturally to me?

I enjoy doing \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (fill in blank) most in
life.

What special skills or attributes do people notice about me?

What kinds of positive feedback do I receive from others?

What kinds of cues do I respond to? Visual? Auditory?

Recognizing Your Own Cues

When I ask my clients about cues, most of them don't know how to
respond, so I usually follow up with a few other questions. I might ask,
for example, "Do you post notes to yourself?" "Does making lists help
you?" If they answer "yes," I tell them that they most likely respond to
visual cues. But if they get overwhelmed by Post-it notes and prefer
alarms sounding on their PDA, computer, or wristwatch, they most likely
respond to auditory cues. Brian, for example, frequently misplaces
things, which is generally not a problem, he said, because he can find
them easily, too. To help him determine the types of cues that would
work best for him in other circumstances, I asked him to take me through
the process of locating his missing keys. "I have sort of a photographic
memory," he said. "It's like there's a videocamera constantly running in
my mind, so I can sort of see where they probably are." After we
discussed the way he retrieves missing items by use of his "Xray
vision," Brian realized that he responded to visual cues, information he
could then use to create appropriate structures to meet his ADHD
challenges. You can do the same by thinking about areas in which you
typically do well and then basing the structures you build on either
auditory cues---setting alarms and beepers, for example---or visual
cues---posting notes and reminders to yourself. Borrowing What Works

Successful strategizing definitely requires effort. Sometimes that means
thinking about what is working in one aspect of your life but is absent
from another. If you seem to be leading a double life, what structures
are in place in one area that are missing in the other?

"I'm so incompetent," Caroline, a stay-at-home mom and chairwoman of the
Cultural Arts Committee for her large suburban school district, told me
in an early coaching session. Frustrated by her inability to keep a warm
and welcoming home that was also neat and organized, and feeling like a
failure at "no-brainer nonsense like a clean kitchen," Caroline never
considered the years of diverse and expanding programs she had overseen
in her volunteer position in the PTA. Asked to explain how she operated
in that capacity, she said, "Oh, that's easy. I can really 'see the
forest,' so I know what programs I want to bring in, and I can 'see the
trees,' too. I absolutely see how I want the year to evolve and what
each program should include. And then I delegate---I put other people in
charge of carrying out the details along the way. If I had to take care
of the details myself, forget it. I'd get bogged down and then nothing
would ever happen." Caroline understood that although she could also see
the forest and the trees at home, she could never quite carry out the
plan to make her goals real. Through coaching, she realized that to
accomplish her goal---the livedin, nonchaotic refuge she believed her
family deserved---she could borrow from her success in district projects
by applying the same principle at home: She could delegate. "I wonder
why I never just hired somebody in the first place," Caroline said
several months into the new routine of a weekly housekeeper. Giving
herself permission to seek outside help had not been easy, but once she
saw the benefit---her home was at last the inviting sanctuary she had
envisioned ---Caroline felt liberated from the self-imposed burden of
perfection she had too long carried. The dizzying praise she'd always
heard for her committee work had been addictive. Needing to feel the
same pride elsewhere---indeed, everywhere---in her life, she had been
unable to admit the limitations precluding it. Instead, she had spent
years trying to deny the most universal human quality we know:
fallibility. Sadly, I didn't have to think too hard about why Caroline
had resisted help. In the same way that adults with ADHD feel as
incompetent and unworthy as others have implied or stated for years,
they also exert great energy trying to hide their weaknesses. To them,
seeking help is equivalent to admitting failure. Perhaps it's just
another of the many paradoxes inherent in ADHD behavior, but the idea of
simply stating, "I can't do this.

Can you help?" is abhorrent. It confirms every negative tape in their
already self-accusing heads. What Caroline needed to understand is that
she could---in fact, she must ---acknowledge her weaknesses and address
them in the best ways possible. Only after she slowed down and analyzed
the issue without her negative tapes playing---only after she saw the
situation strategically---was she finally able to come up with a tactic
to address it. Understanding at last that she didn't have to be
perfect---that there was no shame in admitting she couldn't do
everything well---she could take advantage of reliable outside help.
Caroline could also base her strategy on the same strength that had
served her in her cultural arts work. Always quick to assess what needed
to be done, she was equally perceptive assessing which person should do
it. Caroline understood well what another client, a financial executive,
had stated years ago. "You have to carefully choose the right level of
expertise around you," he said, "so you can learn to successfully
delegate and not be in a position where you're always teaching. That's
the point of delegating, isn't it? To let somebody else who knows how
and what to do take charge." As you self-coach, you can, and must, slow
down enough to see your issues strategically. Remember, coaching focuses
on the practical; it is outcome-based and goal-oriented. Concentrate not
on why you are doing something, but on what and how. Practice asking
yourself the kinds of nonjudgmental questions I ask my clients: • What
is the issue? • What can I do about it? • What strategies that are
effective "there" can I also use "here"? • How can I maintain progress?
• How can I set up accountability? IN THE A-N-S-W-E-R, STRATEGIZING
MEANS: • Creating a plan for self-improvement • Acknowledging your
strengths as well as your challenges • Matching strength-based
strategies to those ADHD challenges • Recognizing strategies and
structures in one part of your life that you might implement in another
• Understanding the cues to which you respond • Engineering your
environment to meet your specific needs

Later in the book, I'll detail specific strength-based strategies my
clients have created for addressing their specific ADHD issues. Then you
can look back at the worksheets you've completed so far and develop
strategies for your own challenges, tailored to your own strengths. W.
WORKING THE PLAN

"Why would I want to share a room with someone swinging from a
chandelier?" Madeline, an artist living in Boulder, Colorado, asked the
other day. We had been talking about the necessity of follow-through and
commitment when Madeline offered her analogy to roommates. "It's like
I'm sharing a room with myself," she said. "If I don't make a plan for
the day, and if I don't have a strong sense of purpose in keeping the
plan, I swear it's like living with a madwoman." Keeping the plan, what
I've termed working the plan, is definitely a challenging aspect of the
A-N-S-W-E-R for most clients. But considering the culture in which we
live, how could it be otherwise? Quick picks, instant access, instant
abs: They're all there for the grabbing, society's push-of-thebutton
promises and results, effortless and easy and fingertip close. Working
the plan is anything but easy. But working the plan is necessary. And
yes, working the plan requires effort---consistent effort, long effort,
deep effort. But if you commit to the process of change---if you
understand that change takes time---it will be rewarding effort as well.
Interestingly, most of my clients understand the importance of the long
view. They state their goal, they know what they want, they develop
their plan, and for the most part, they do so with enthusiasm, but the
very enthusiasm that can spark effort often stems from an impulsivity
that can lead them astray. "For years I've known I have to lose weight,"
said Amy, a Boston commercial real estate broker, "and a million times
I've researched different diets or different gyms in my area. I sign on
to a diet program or I find a gym I can go to before work, and no matter
what I choose, something else winds up looking better, so I switch. I
always get really excited about the idea in the beginning, and
then---poof! A few weeks later, it's over. I can't tell you how many
times I've done stuff like that. I never get anywhere."

Amy was hardly alone in being consistently inconsistent. Distracted by
any number of other issues or ideas, adults with ADHD get sidetracked
from the original goal and abandon their original plan before they've
invested any time in carrying it out. Lack of consistency inevitably
negates any progress they might have made and prevents the long-term
benefits of the systems they've set up. But if you're going to
succeed---if you're going to reach the goals that you've chosen---you
have to recognize the difference between making the plan and working the
plan. Working it means sticking with it. It means fighting through both
the obstacles that stand in the way and the frustration that delayed
payback for immediate effort provokes. It means desire and then more
desire and the refusal to give up. Marvin, a hedge fund manager I coach,
was echoing many of my clients when he lamented his struggles at the
office. "It would sound crazy to people I work with," he said, "but I
have never felt successful there. I never feel any continuity. I want to
get into a flow where I'll finally be free of obstructions. I just can't
keep reverting back to the same old behaviors that throw me off track."
Engineering the Environment

As you self-coach, consider what will help you commit to your long-term
plan. You can start by engineering your environment---setting up
reminders, like those auditory or visual cues I discussed earlier. If
you respond to visual cues, for example, create a screen saver to remind
you daily of your ultimate goal. If you prefer auditory cues, set alarms
to keep you on task, or record messages to yourself---reminders of what
you want to accomplish--- and listen to them in your car as you're
driving to and from work. Make a habit of repeating your mission
statement, the mantra you created to guide you along. More important, be
aware of the nature and biology of ADHD--- forgetting the importance of
the goal---and don't get caught in that trap. Plan ahead by observing
what gets you off track. In your notebook or PDA file, make note of
those times you get sidetracked and create strategies to address what is
keeping you from your goal. Through coaching, Amy came to realize that
three or four weeks after she had started any exercise program, she
would abandon it for something

new. Forewarned is forearmed, as my father used to say, so, using this
insight, she created a strategy to address her old habit of cut and run.
As she began her membership in yet another gym, she wrote and addressed
a letter to herself, instructing her closest friend to mail it three
weeks from that day. "Dear Amy," the letter said. "You've been going to
the gym for three weeks and you're probably thinking about quitting
again, but remember that YOU WANT TO LOSE 20 POUNDS!!! KEEP GOING!!!
DON'T QUIT!!! HANG IN THERE!!!" Her goal clearly spelled out on the page
in front of her, Amy would not likely turn away from the commitment she
was trying to keep. Amy understood her own history, and she had learned
to acknowledge her ADHD. Knowing that her tendency was to live in the
moment, and admitting that she could easily talk herself out of going to
the gym, she was able to narrow in on the one thing that took her off
course, forgetting the importance of her commitment. Knowing and
accepting this part of her ADHD behavior allowed her to take action: She
created a strategy to jolt her memory three weeks into her exercise
program. By writing a letter beforehand, Amy reminded herself of her
weak spot, which in turn helped her keep to her commitment. Being
Accountable

Amy also enlisted the service of a friend, a tactic that sometimes makes
the difference between continuing and giving up. One of the lessons
clients learn in coaching is the importance of accountability. Somehow
the notion of enlisting another's help or answering to another for what
you have done ---or not done---can be a strong motivator, a reason to
move forward when it seems easier to turn aside. An accountability
partner can also help silence the negative tapes that threaten you into
surrender, strongly urging that you can do when your own voice is
whispering, I can't. In the end, as one of my clients noted, you have to
be your own best friend. "I used to think I had to take care of
everybody else," Josh told me during one of our last sessions, "so I had
to learn to work hard for myself, for the changes that I wanted to make.
I had to learn how to be flexible, to set up a plan that works with my
ADHD." Then he added, with energy and pride, "And I did." IN THE
A-NS-W-E-R, WORKING THE PLAN MEANS:

• Taking action • Actively following the strategies you created • Using
your environment to keep you on track • Reminding yourself of past
consequences • Enlisting others to help with your plan • Being
accountable to yourself and others you've enlisted • Being willing to
put in the time it takes to change • Having a sense of purpose

If you are going to succeed in changing your life, you cannot
underestimate the importance of having a sense of purpose. As Madeline
put it, "Having a very high sense of purpose is key to completing any
plan I make. Now I know that I can't just 'jump in' to a plan. I have to
do it purposefully and be centered about it. Otherwise, I'm simply
making a recipe for disaster, stirring it up and then watching it burn."
Choose the recipe for success, instead. Work that plan! Be willing to
invest the time! Really want it! E. EVALUATE THE PLAN

"It's funny how clear things are becoming since we started this
coaching," Andrew, another of my clients, said the other day. "I can see
now that I've always had a remarkable unconscious repertoire of
behaviors to accommodate for the problems in my personal and
professional life. None of them have been particularly healthy, and most
of them are downright self-defeating. Mainly, I had to make sure people
held me in impossibly high regard but would fondly excuse me from any
concrete expectations." Then he added an observation so rich in insight
that it can affect your self-coaching journey as well: "Only because
I've slowed down enough to think about what I'd been doing---to
reflect---can I see this. And I think taking the necessary time has been
the real difference in making the changes I listed as my goals way back
when we started. I know everything in life seems ridiculously
fast-paced, but I still wonder why so few people understand the concept
of time when it comes to change." What Andrew was referring to is the
incontrovertible truth about changing your life. As you self-coach, you
cannot judge a strategy's success or failure after one or two attempts
at implementing it. You have to take time to let it work, and you have
to take time to evaluate whether it's

working. The symptoms of your ADHD and the goals you hope to accomplish
might be vastly different from Andrew's, but the responsibility of
evaluating your progress belongs to each of you. Coaching, remember, is
a process, and the changes you seek happen not instantly, but
incrementally over time, sometimes a very long time. Because success
requires commitment, and because the strategies you design are as
individual as your individual needs, trial and error is an inherent, and
timedependent, part of the process. As you self-initiate change, you
have to evaluate constantly whether the strategies and structures you've
created serve your goals. If you're heading steadily toward where you
eventually want to be, then your strategy is apparently a good one and
you can continue to leave it in place. But if you're falling behind or
slipping off course, you'll have to make a correction. In the
A-N-S-W-E-R, that's what evaluating means: judging or appraising the
success of your plan and strategy, and acting, or reacting, accordingly.
Sometimes modifying a plan is easier said than done for individuals with
ADHD, not because they can't think of another strategy, but because they
haven't taken the time to analyze what is wrong, and right, with the
original one. One of my clients, for example, knew how quickly she would
become impatient when she didn't get immediate results. "I could feel
myself getting in a panic or a frenzy," Mariana told me, "and I'd wind
up just ditching the entire plan. I never knew how to look at individual
parts of it, so I never really knew which parts might be working and
which parts weren't. I'd get so frustrated that I'd just give up on
everything." Through coaching, Mariana understood the importance of
acknowledging her history of impatience in order to counteract it. In
her notebook, she began to track her progress with the plan on which she
was currently working, addressing specific structures within it. By
slowing down to analyze discrete elements of her plan, she could
evaluate each separately and then make the necessary changes, rather
than give up entirely on what might, with a few adjustments, have been
workable and successful. Because slowing down to evaluate is essential
to your own success, turn to a clean page in your notebook or file, and
under the heading "Evaluate," write down the following questions to help
you assess your progress:

What is working in my plan? Try to identify specific progress using this

strategy, such as specific actions you're now taking. Why is it working?
If you can identify why it works, you can use the information in
creating other strategies. What measures or system can I use to track my
progress? If something is not working, what about it isn't? Can you
isolate one thing that

isn't? What can I do about it? Remember David, who had selected the
wrong day

to pay his bills? A simple change like the one he made could make all
the difference for you, too! When will I do it? A goal must have a
specific start date, or it is merely a wish. Set a date to begin! What
is my commitment level? On a scale of 1, lowest, to 5, highest, rank
your commitment. Remember that it has to be high if you're going to
succeed! How can I remember my commitment to my goal? How can you
engineer your environment to help you? What visual or auditory cues can
you use? Keeping track of your progress and adjusting your strategy
along the way are essential to success, so go back to these questions
regularly. But precisely how often you must reevaluate your plan is
impossible to answer, for just as there is no one-size-fitsall strategy,
neither is there a one-sizefits-all timeline. Taking Time

The timeline itself is twofold: First you have to give your strategy
enough time to work. Don't forget that you're trying to create new
habits or behaviors that will eventually be as instinctive and familiar
as the destructive past ones that you're trying to eliminate. You've had
years to establish those negative habits, and you can't expect new ones
to develop overnight. They can't, and they won't. Unfortunately, the
patience necessary in this quest for self-change can be a rare commodity
for adults with ADHD. For many of my clients, the process itself becomes
boring, so they don't stick to any system long

enough to solidify the new habits they need. Like Amy, they're on to a
new plan before letting the original one develop, impulsively feeding
their need for distraction by turning their attention elsewhere. Others
are like Mariana, deciding that nothing is right so everything must be
wrong. Still others spend inordinate amounts of time developing
elaborate plans but never invest any time in carrying them out. The plan
grabs their attention, but working the plan doesn't hold it. But once
you've accepted the importance of patience in executing your plan---in
the premise that change takes time---you can consider the second aspect
of the coaching timeline: taking time to evaluate the plan. Just as many
of my clients speak with me weekly, you, as your own coach, can make
weekly appointments with yourself to assess how your plan is working. As
you ask yourself the questions in your notebook, however, be aware of
how much time has passed since you began working the plan. Evaluating
weekly does not mean changing strategies weekly. Change will not happen
overnight. Give the plan time to work before you change it. Although I
want you to expect the best as you self-coach, I also want you to be
prepared for the frustration that will likely set in. If, for example,
you get sidetracked from your goal, use the evaluation time to consider
the following questions: Am I repeating an old pattern of not giving
something enough time? Do I want to quit out of sheer boredom? Is
wanting to quit a warning sign of a repeated pattern I fall into? Am I
separating the action from my ADHD brain? In other words, is it my

ADHD causing the plan not to work, or is it the plan itself? How can I
make the plan more enticing for me to follow without compromising the
entire plan? How does my plan support my mission statement?

"I've finally learned something that has helped me evaluate my
progress," my client Tim told me recently. "I actually made a sign to
hang in my office and another one to hang over my desk at home, so every
day I look at it and say the words out loud as a reminder: 'Progress Is
Likely to Be Uncertain and Unsteady and Slow.' I think it helps, because
I can feel myself becoming more patient." Tim was on to something when
he learned to acknowledge and accept delayed gratification, an almost
alien concept in today's "give it to me now!" culture. Setting the words
in front of him was also wise, for the repetition of his belief that
change takes time deepened his commitment to taking time to achieve his
goals. His habit of stating that progress takes time became the habit of
actually giving progress time. And, as success often begets success, the
patience Tim learned to practice has begun to manifest itself elsewhere.
Understanding that he has to think long-term, he has designed a yearlong
plan of what he wants to accomplish and monthly, weekly, and daily
strategies to get there. "Now I plan each day the night before," he
said, "so that the day's plan will get me closer to the goals I set up
for myself for the year. I hold myself accountable to complete the day's
plan. I don't put more on the plan than I'm confident I can fully
complete. I regularly revise my annual plan to reflect my current
position. I do my level best to live and work by design---I define it,
timeframe it, and visualize the steps. I never stop evaluating the
procedures I've chosen." Tim's commitment to his goal, and his
commitment to the process of accomplishing it, can and should be your
own. Recognize, as he does, that self-management is a journey, and take
responsibility for following the long path stretched before you. Keep
track of your progress, and evaluate your steps along the way,
remembering also to note your triumphs and your strengths in your
evaluation. "I've come to know and trust and love my X-ray vision,"
Brian said. "It's my competitive secret, my distinctive competency.
Every time I see how it works for me, I really believe I can reach the
goals I've set. It's my motivator! If I can do X, I feel like I can do
Y, even if Z doesn't happen to be working." Develop the self-awareness
to self-initiate change. It's the best way to energize your effort to
succeed.

IN THE A-N-S-W-E-R, EVALUATING THE PLAN MEANS: • Taking time to appraise
your plan and strategies • Allowing sufficient time for new strategies
to work • Changing those strategies that don't work by creating new ones
based on your strengths • Continually renewing your commitment to the
plan • Affirming your success along the way • Energizing your effort R.
REPEAT AND REINFORCE

Several months ago, after a speech I delivered about the benefits of
ADHD coaching, I was asked if any one part of the A-N-S-W-E-R is more
important than another. "Is there any one part a client absolutely can't
skip?" an audience member wanted to know. Fully aware that those with
ADHD often look for shortcuts when the road ahead seems long and uneven,
I answered immediately, "They're all important." Then I added just as
quickly, "But one step does need emphasis. The most critical thing in
the long run has to be repeating the process continually."
Unfortunately, repeating the process is also the most difficult. People
with ADHD have practiced masking it and pretending it's otherwise,
"overcompensating and going overboard," as one client put it, "to exceed
others' expectations." How easy it becomes, then, to forget a lifetime
of struggling when a strategy has worked once! How easy, how natural, to
want to bask---and linger---in the pleasure of that momentary success!
But if you're going to succeed at achieving those goals you've
articulated---if you're finally going to love the way you live---then
you cannot let down your guard. Instead of becoming complacent about
meeting one goal, build on your success and set another goal.
Unfortunately, people with ADHD have memory lapses. They easily forget
the consequences of the past and the goal for the future. When a plan or
structure works, they ease off, thinking, "I don't need this anymore.
I've solved my problem. I'm fine now," and they stop using new
strategies. They slip back into old habits, the bad habits they had been
determined to leave behind. As I remind my clients over and over again,
quitting after one success is not how permanent change occurs. Remember
that you're trying to create new habits, new automatic responses to
replace years of self-defeating

behaviors. Remember Tim's daily repetition, "Progress is likely to be
uncertain and unsteady and slow." It's hard work to do so, but effort is
everything! You have to know that and accept that, and just as
important, you have to develop, like Tim, the habit of repetition.
Repeating and reinforcing strategies is critical to your success. The
idea is to use the success of meeting small challenges to stimulate the
push for meeting larger ones.

What is the A-N-S-W-E-R, then, in self-coaching? Acknowledge that you
need to repeat the process, narrow in on how you can remain vigilant,
set up strategies to remind you that you will forget, know that it takes
work, work, and more work, continually evaluate how you are doing, and
repeat, repeat, repeat! "To stay motivated, focused, and self-aware,"
one client told me, "I drew up a list of beliefs as I was thinking about
my mission statement. I try to read them every day when I have my
morning coffee, but I also have copies in my office, in my briefcase,
even folded up in my wallet just in case, so I have no excuse for not
repeating them. It's been more than two years and I haven't missed a
single day." Accepting not only his ADHD, but the responsibility for
addressing and managing it as well, Michael reminds himself daily of his
goals and his plan to achieve them. "It helps shift the constant
self-doubt to a confidence in my ability to see patterns, things,
behaviors," he said. "Doing even little things like this consistently
gives me that confidence. But I refuse to fool myself by thinking I
can't slip back. That's why, no matter how hokey it might seem, I affirm
my goals and my mission statement every day." With a belief in
possibility, with vigilance and effort and an iron will to succeed, you
can commit to changing your life. But remember why you inquired about
self-coaching in the first place. If you have ADHD, you tend to live in
the present, forgetting both the pain of past behaviors and the goals of
future success. You really have to repeat the A-N-S-W-E-R process so
that self-coaching will work. Without it, change will be difficult---if
not impossible---to self-initiate. IN THE A-N-S-W-E-R, REPEAT AND
REINFORCE MEANS:

• Acknowledge once again that you have ADHD • Remind yourself that your
ADHD will not go away • Narrow the focus again to one or two key issues
• Strategize again, build strength-based structures • Ritualize changes,
create an additional routine • Watch that you do not let up, take
shortcuts, or get lazy when working the plan • Evaluate again, chart how
much progress you've made

The Big Picture "I accept ADHD as an explanation, not an excuse,"
Michael told me, "and I take full responsibility for my life. I strive
each day to manage the negative aspects and accentuate the positive."
But Michael didn't tell just me. He tells himself, daily, as part of his
mission statement, as one of the foundations on which his growing
self-confidence rests. I mention it because with all the emphasis on
compensating for ADHD symptoms, I don't want you to lose sight of the
positive ways in which your ADHD might manifest itself. Denial of your
ADHD may be the "untenable, indefensible position" Tim knows it is, but
so is denial of the wonderful qualities that make you who you are. "I'm
unique," Tim can now state out loud. "I love my spontaneous, impulsive
nature. I love that I let myself be randomly kind each day!" If you're
going to succeed at self-coaching---if you're going to let the
AN-S-W-E-R work---I urge you to be as kind to yourself as I try to be to
my clients, as resolutely and stubbornly and firmly kind. "The
relationship is everything," Mariana said when I asked her to evaluate
our progress together. "You believe in me. That's what I need . . .
that's what you provide." As your own coach, you're in a relationship
with yourself now. Make that relationship work. Believe in yourself.
Have the heart and the vision to propel yourself forward. OceanofPDF.com

PART II

Coaching the ADHD Brain

Among the rituals of my childhood, Sunday morning meant ten o'clock
church. It meant prayer and sanctity and family togetherness, my parents
and siblings and I dressed in our finest and seated at the front of the
congregation, all eyes and ears on the preacher exhorting us toward
salvation. My own salvation was always in doubt, however, for if my
father's predictions proved accurate, the Pearly Gates would surely be
locked by the time I showed up to claim my reward. "What's wrong with
you, Nancy?" he'd be yelling as the rest of the family piled into the
car at 9:45. Then, honking the horn in rhythm with each syllable, he'd
continue to threaten and coax me from the house, where I remained
half-asleep and half-dressed and fully in dread of my fate. "I'm giving
you exactly sixty seconds to get out here," he'd yell, a prelude to the
punishment he'd promise next. "Not one more second or you're grounded."
Most Sundays I'd manage to scramble into the backseat with a second or
two to spare, and off the family would go, picture perfect and prompt as
we pulled up in front of the church. Once I was inside, it wasn't the
preacher's voice or the holy men's choir that echoed in my ears. It was
the familiar strains of my father's lament, the aching reminder of his
wishing

and worrying, that even the angels themselves could not hope to drown
out. "What's going to become of you, Nancy? You'll never get anywhere if
you're always going to be late. I wish I knew what to do with you. I
wish I knew how to help." I wish I could say that the look of concern in
my father's eyes or the desperate love that prompted his punishments or
even the groundings and phoneless nights were cure enough for my
perpetual lateness. I wish I could say that I woke up one morning before
the alarm startled me from my dreams; that I was early, early, early for
breakfast and school; that I never again had to sneak into class and
slip into my seat just before the teacher reached the last of the
alphabetical names on her attendance list---Young, Nancy. I wish I could
also say that years later, I never disappointed my friends who were
waiting for me; that at last they could stop counting on not counting on
me; that this was college, after all, and of course I could be counted
on---to keep my commitments, to complete my work, to do what I said I
would do. But it wasn't that easy. And it certainly would never be
automatic. Learning as much as I could about ADHD and acknowledging that
perpetual lateness was more than an exasperating personality quirk were
the only things that ultimately allowed me to stop feeling terrible and
to start changing my ways. Once I finally understood what was going on
with my mind and why, I came up with strategies to address a real ADHD
issue, measuring time. When I was diagnosed with ADHD, I manifested many
of the classic symptoms. I was often distracted. I'd have a million
things going simultaneously but have a hard time following through on
any of them. I was impulsive and restless and easily bored by routine.
You might say that I was like most people diagnosed with ADHD. I
exhibited a multitude of troublesome behaviors, and as much as I wanted
to rush in and conquer them all at once, I had to understand that I
couldn't attack everything. I had to highlight and concentrate on one
symptom at a time. And because time mismanagement was at the root of so
many of my problems, I identified that particular deficit as most
important for me.

The problem of time mismanagement, however, did not---and to this day
does not---exist in a vacuum. Like any other ADHD issue, it's part of a
whole, part and parcel of the many behaviors caused by my ADHD. But to
illustrate how the A-N-S-W-E-R works for specific ADHD symptoms, and to
provide specific strategies to address those symptoms, the following
chapters present stories of various clients, whose names and identifying
particulars have been changed to maintain confidentiality but whose
coaching journeys are portrayed as accurately as possible. Each chapter
highlights one particular ADHD symptom, but this is in no way to suggest
that anyone is a single "ADHD type." It is merely a way of narrowing the
focus, one of the critical steps in self-coaching. I want you to see, in
depth, how real strategies are applied to real problems. Let me stress
again that no one is a single "ADHD type." Most people with the disorder
manifest several ADHD characteristics simultaneously, one or two of
which may be more readily apparent or troublesome than others.
Highlighting one symptom at a time is simply a tool for me to teach you
the process of self-coaching. I hope that by recognizing yourself in
some of the descriptions that follow, you'll learn something about
changing your own life. It's true that to address my own issue with
measuring time, I've developed strategies involving calendars and
clocks, and it's also true that many people, especially clients, can now
count on me. Before he died, my father could count on me, too, and could
celebrate with me the control over lateness that I'd managed to attain.
"Look what you've accomplished," he'd often tell me, his voice swelling
with pride and his eyes misting. "And you've done it all on your own,"
he'd insist for good measure, until I'd feel as proud and weepy as he.
But whatever I've accomplished as an adult is true only because of the
commitment I've made to the same advice I give you. In my own life---in
my daily life---I follow the steps of the A-N-S-W-E-R, and like others
who experience setbacks and frustration, I dig a little deeper into my
well of resolve when I face my own. I read my mission statement, and I
repeat my daily goals. With years of practice behind me, I've learned
that I cannot, for a single day, let down my guard. But I celebrate my
victories, too, and then I use these successes as motivation to move
forward. Once I've done one thing, I

believe I can do another. That's when I repeat the process of
strategizing and evaluating, working the plan toward the new goal I've
set. Changing your life is a daily struggle. It is for me, it is for my
clients, and it will be for you. But as I said on the first page of this
book, it's also possible, and it's surely worthwhile. I offer my
clients' stories now as proof. OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 5

Time Mismanagement

I was almost thirty by the time I was diagnosed with ADHD, which I think
made me fortunate in a number of respects. For one thing, I had an
adult's appreciation of the stakes involved in addressing the problem.
With a bachelor's degree behind me and a master's degree ahead, I was
extremely motivated to change the ADHD behavior that had plagued my life
to that point. I was also confident that I could escape the potential
consequences of professional failure that undiagnosed ADHD adults might
face. I knew, after all, that the strategies and structures I put in
place as a student could ultimately transfer to the professional life
still in front of me. By the time I began working with a coach, I had
learned enough about ADHD and my own struggles to prevent them from
interfering with my life's work. Mostly, I had learned to manage the
time mismanagement that had defined my earlier years. Maybe that helps
to explain the particular empathy I felt when Claire, one of the first
clients with whom I worked as an "official" coach, narrated a story
eerily familiar in its broader sense to the one I intimately knew. Like
the earlier me, Claire could not seem to capture the essence of time.
Estimating how long a given task would take was virtually impossible,
and plan as she might, she continually disappointed both herself and
others by failing to translate promises into reality. Family, friends,
and now professional associates were increasingly affected by her
inability to manage time, and Claire understood that neither they nor
she could continue to live with her chronic dysfunction.

But it was Lucy, her thirteen-year-old daughter, who had unwittingly
challenged Claire into seeking help. "I know I can't depend on you,"
Lucy had said, so matter-of-factly that Claire was startled by the power
of Lucy's indictment. "And you know it, too." The judgment and
disapproval of others had been difficult enough for Claire to process,
but the condemnation of Lucy had been more than she could bear.
Interestingly, Claire had believed after her recent divorce that leaving
the investment firm where she'd worked for ten years to begin a private
practice from home would be helpful. As she saw it, the benefits were
clear. She could finally eliminate the stressful office environment
she'd blamed for the collapse of her marriage. She could give her
clients independent advice when she didn't have to consider partners'
views. She could set her own schedule, she could be flexible when she
needed to be, she could spend as much time with her daughter as Lucy
requested or required. Her problems, in other words, could disappear
with the commute that she'd also leave behind. What Claire never
considered, however, was that the high-pressure environment from which
she wanted to escape had served as the structure she really needed to
keep track of time. "I felt like I was on an assembly line," she said of
the timelines and deadlines and partners' demands that made up a typical
day at the office. "And I couldn't take it for one more second." What
she didn't say---what she didn't understand until later---was that the
external order imposed by colleagues had been compensating for her
internal deficiency managing schedules. She had been successful, in
other words, to the extent that others had been programming time for
her. Although she could admit it only grudgingly at first, even her
ex-husband had provided her with the time management she couldn't
provide for herself. His reminders about when things needed to be done
hadn't been nagging after all, Claire came to realize. They'd been a
survival technique to help her, and the family, function. And although
she swore that she was "on top of things" and "great at making my own
schedules," she became painfully aware once she was in her own practice
that all the planning in the world did not translate to planning
carefully. She was "tunneling" into projects, she said, and before she
knew it, hours would pass. What might begin as a simple check of one
fact on the

Internet could easily turn into three days of information seeking. Left
to her own devices, she faced increasing pressure to do what was less
and less possible for her to do---work within an established time frame,
setting and observing the parameters herself. It seemed her business was
doomed before it had a chance to survive. Claire didn't know if the most
important relationship in her life, the relationship with Lucy, would
survive, either. She frequently let Lucy down, forgetting to be where
she had promised to be at various appointed times. Soccer practice
pickup, the mother-daughter school luncheon, the class play performance:
Claire couldn't get any of it right. "Some of my friends don't even
think I have a mother!" Lucy cried after a particularly bitter
disappointment. "They think I made you up. What's wrong with you?"
Desperate to change her life, to keep it from unraveling completely,
Claire turned to coaching for an answer. The A-N-S-W-E-R for Claire
"I'll do anything to change," Claire declared in our first coaching
session. A. ACKNOWLEDGING THE ADHD

Only by understanding the implications of ADHD could Claire acknowledge
how it had been functioning in her life---that the condition itself had
elevated what might be an easily explained annoyance for most people
into a serious problem for her. Juggling the responsibilities of a job,
a family, and a household can be trying for anyone, not just for a mom
or a home office worker. It's easy to forget to run an errand or make a
phone call, and it's easy to run late for an appointment now and then.
It becomes a far more significant issue, however, when mismanagement of
time becomes pervasive enough to affect your job and your personal life,
crippling your self-esteem and dismantling your dreams along the way.
Claire had to admit that chronic lateness---always overestimating what
she could accomplish in any given time period---could not be explained
away as a personality quirk. Neither could it be ignored.

By acknowledging her ADHD, and by understanding the connection between
her inability to measure time and the neurobiological disorder at its
root, Claire could dismiss the instinctive emotional response---I'm so
stupid, I'm so undependable, I'm a terrible mother---on which she had
relied for years and replace it with an objectively designed strategy to
address the problem. All the apologies in the world, all the tears and
accusations and pleas and promises, would do nothing to alter her sense
of time. But separating herself from her problem and taking action
would. Claire exhibited the same self-loathing to which many ADHD
clients are prone. In addition to the guilt and embarrassment that
frequently reduced her to tears, she'd often experienced a debilitating
frustration when she couldn't accomplish what she initially set out to
do. She was blaming a lack of ability within herself because she
couldn't blame a lack of time. "I can't ever do anything in a normal
amount of time," she said. "I don't know where the hours go." Like other
clients, Claire could free up an entire day, even two or three days, to
complete a project, only to find no time to finish at the end.
Sometimes, she admitted, she'd waited until the last minute to start the
task. Other times she'd given in to diversions. With no prior warning,
weeding the garden or cleaning out her closet could suddenly lure her
off course and soak up her time. "I'll just do this 'quickly' before I
start to work on my . . ." had become a way of life for Claire, but her
real issue was not having a conceptual framework for judging time.
Unfortunately, she could never see the full picture. She couldn't
clearly envision the details involved in performing a task or completing
an activity, even a simple one like shopping or folding the laundry.
Already late to pick up Lucy, for example, Claire sometimes decided that
in between home and the soccer field she could mail packages at the post
office and drop off clothes at the dry cleaner's. Inconceivable as it
might sound in the light of past experience, she would nevertheless
believe it possible to "just run by" these places on the way. To make
matters worse, she'd often have to go back into the house for forgotten
keys or a wallet, and she'd be immediately sidetracked by a phone call,
never getting to the errands or to her daughter, whose pickup was the
actual task in the first place. "My ex-husband used to say I could do
the same thing with the same

results ninety-nine times in a row, and I'd still be surprised and
crying and apologizing the hundredth time. I can't stand it anymore,"
she told me. Acknowledging her ADHD and understanding its effects on her
ability to estimate time eventually helped Claire focus on solving the
problem, which in turn helped eliminate her chronic sense of failure.
Because she came to understand that her ADHD would not magically
disappear, that it would be part of her forever, she learned despite the
setbacks to address it, directing her energy toward the issues and away
from self-blame. Discovering the Root of Time Mismanagement

Claire's real problem was that although she could visualize the
completion of any given activity, she could not anticipate the actual
passage of time carrying out details of the activity, a phenomenon I
know firsthand. Like many of my clients, I can always visualize the
ending. I saw myself graduating from Harvard, and it happened; I saw
myself finishing the Boston Marathon, and I did. And when a business
trip or vacation is imminent, I can also visualize myself at the
airport, presenting my ID at the counter, walking to the gate, boarding
the plane, and taking my seat. But what I cannot visualize are the
details in between, like packing, leaving the house, driving to the
airport, and parking the car, which means I'm always running late for
flights and racing onto the plane at the last possible second. Somehow I
can't slow down enough to break tasks up into blocks of time. I can't
anticipate that time actually passes as I take the individual steps
between planning for the trip and walking onto the plane. For
individuals with ADHD, much of the time mismanagement problem centers on
this inability to see themselves all the way through an activity, a
project, or even a simple task. Not making plans at all, making
unrealistic plans, overplanning, and failing to stick to plans all
contribute to the problem, and although none are ADHD-specific, they're
definitely magnified for those who have ADHD. N. NARROWING THE FOCUS

"Look at this list," Claire said a few weeks into our coaching. "No
wonder I'm such a failure." Then she asked, her voice a frustrated mix
of sadness and shame, "Who could stand having a wife or mother like me?
Who'd want me to manage their investments?"

Claire's self-evaluation sheet had revealed multiple outcomes of her
inability to manage time, and the length of the list was daunting to
her. But narrowing the focus was easy on one level: Whatever other ADHD
symptoms she might be manifesting, most of the negative effects she
hoped to eliminate stemmed from her issues with time. The more difficult
aspect of narrowing the focus for Claire was learning to self-monitor,
which had been alien to her up to this point. Like most people who
mismanage time, she had never looked objectively at how, all plans to
the contrary, she wound up off course---how she could be hanging
curtains in the bathroom, for example, when she was supposed to be
cheering for Lucy on the soccer sideline; how she could return from a
quick noon post office run six hours later, unmailed bills still on the
dashboard of the car and an investment prospectus still unread. "Oh,
that happens to me sometimes," most people have probably said, but most
people---the vast majority of the population who don't struggle with
ADHD---haven't experienced time mismanagement as a way of life. Most
people realize when they've been sidetracked. Most people can look at
the clock and readjust. If you're like Claire, a key to making progress
is self-observation, which means monitoring your actions to pinpoint
what takes you off course. Claire was often lured from her goal by
things she'd never planned for, things she'd never built into her day,
timeless things, in a sense, because she hadn't considered doing them at
all. She had never considered looking objectively at how her hours
"disappeared." Just as in other coaching strategies, there's something
of a paradox inherent in self-monitoring. It takes time, a precious and
rare commodity if you mismanage time, to observe literally every
activity, significant or otherwise, in which you engage. It takes time
to list and to study what you do during the course of a day, and it
takes time to anticipate distractions that could lead you astray. It
takes the time that people who mismanage time think they don't have. But
since taking time is the only way to manage time, you have to commit to
the process if you're going to change your life. For one thing, by
monitoring how you spend your time, you'll eliminate the denial that
characterizes so many clients, who can't understand where the time went.
Once she saw in writing that "just five more minutes" in the garden had
turned to two hours turning compost, Claire could no longer

dismiss as "No way!" the amount of time her attention had been diverted
from her primary goal. When she saw in writing that the one hour she'd
allotted for research of an investment point had turned to six hours
reading about the latest billionaires, she could no longer deny the
hyperfocusing that had kept her off track. Once she began to monitor how
she spent time, Claire also learned to prevent likely distractions
before they emerged. It wasn't easy to become self-observant, but by
asking herself the following questions, she inched her way toward the
control of life she had sought, learning to feel better about herself in
the process: • What might get in the way of my primary commitment? •
What can I do to stop myself from engaging in the distraction? • What
can I do to prevent the distraction in the first place? S. STRATEGIZING

Claire needed to create strength-based strategies for estimating and
measuring time, strategies based on routine and structure and on a means
of measuring the completion time of an activity within that structure.
At the same time, though, she had to avoid the trap of premature
gratification--- spending so much time on planning that she never got to
the work. Clearly, there's nothing wrong, and there's much right, with
making detailed plans. But individuals with ADHD can derive so much
pleasure from the planning itself that they believe they've been
committed to the action as well. They feel in control when they see the
schedule they've devised, and they equate the time spent drawing it up
with time spent carrying it out. Planning

To keep herself honest about where her time was actually going, Claire
established a defined start and stop time for planning the day's
activities, setting an alarm to signal the end of a planning session.
Then she printed the plan she'd created, placed it in front of her, and
checked off each step of the task as she completed it. Detailed planning
was difficult for Claire, because, despite making elaborate plans in the
past, she was not used to making workable ones, plans that allowed for
less obvious details, the ones she couldn't "see"

because of her ADHD. She could envision calling a client, and she could
envision discussing a mutual fund he'd been considering, but she
couldn't envision discussing the details of various asset allotments and
turnover ratios and performance charts that her client would want her to
explain, which made completing business in the time she originally
allotted impossible. Claire literally had to learn a new way of thinking
with her ADHD in mind. She had to acknowledge and accept that
underestimating the amount of time needed for a particular activity is
normal, especially when she was beginning the process. I tell my clients
that much of what they initially plan is going to be more a wish list
than reality, but that if they stick with the process, they'll learn
from experience how to be more realistic in allotting time to task.
Learning how to plan properly was tedious and anxiety-producing work in
the beginning, and Claire admitted to "crumpling up the stupid paper and
throwing it against the wall" on many days, but the satisfaction she
began to derive from marking accomplishments eventually surpassed the
agitation of paying attention to details. Timers

Claire began to use timers to her advantage. She bought a countdown
timer with a particularly piercing buzz and used it to keep track of the
"just a few more minutes" that had been throwing her off course. As soon
as she began a task that wasn't specifically spelled out on her plan for
the day, she hit the timer, which was always set for five minutes. Trial
and error had also taught her to place the timer slightly out of reach.
She hated its incessant buzzing, so she couldn't ignore its reminder to
get back on task. The physical act of leaving the specific spot in which
she was working and moving to the timer to shut it off made her more
likely to disengage from the impulsive activity and get back to the one
on her plan. Bookends and Anchors

To restore the sense of continuity of time that her colleagues had
provided at the firm, Claire needed to create home rituals and routines
that centered on time. The first thing she did was to create "bookends"
for each day by getting up and going to bed at the same set times. The
routine, which was relatively

easy to establish because she could follow Lucy's existing schedule,
provided a rudimentary sense of structure and a familiarity with the
time at which these activities took place. She also set a time to eat
lunch each day and a time to exercise by walking the dog immediately
after. By setting structures for a few basic needs---sleep, food,
exercise--- Claire became conscious of scheduled activities throughout
her day. The structures in turn became "anchors" for each day, providing
her a sense of how the day broke down into segments. By becoming aware
of when the next activity in her routine would begin, Claire ultimately
learned to anticipate what she could or couldn't do in a given time
period, which made her less inclined to begin tasks that would take her
off track. Multiple Alarms and Backup

To reinforce the concept of "bookends" and "anchors," and to help her
become more consistent in her daily activities, Claire set several
alarms to sound at various parts of the day---at 8:50, the signal to
report into her home office at 9:00; at 11:50, a reminder to stop for
lunch at noon; and at 3:50, the cue to pick up Lucy at 4:05. She knew,
for example, that if she weren't sitting at her desk at 9:00 a.m., she
would probably be doing something "unplanned." The alarm served as a
warning to report to her office. More important, the alarm focused her
on adhering to the schedule she had planned. Borrowing from her
"planning" strategy, Claire set her alarms in inconvenient places that
she would have to walk to in order to silence them. Her office was near
the kitchen, so she placed the alarm in the hallway she'd have to use on
the way to lunch. Any temptation to hunker down and skip lunch---the
hyperfocusing to which she often fell prey---would be offset by the
piercing signal she couldn't ignore. By arranging her environment,
Claire helped herself set a routine. W. WORKING THE PLAN

Claire had initially placed a large clock by her computer.
Unfortunately, she rarely, if ever, looked at it. She also wrote out
endless to-do lists. She didn't look at them, either. I gave Claire
credit for trying, but the visual cues she was using clearly weren't
designed for her strengths. She agreed to my suggestion of auditory cues
like alarms or music. When the timers and buzzers began to work, she

decided to try a wristwatch with multiple alarms, setting them to sound
every hour so that she could hear the passing of time. By knowing that a
particular amount of time had elapsed, she could then compare her
printed plan with what she had actually accomplished and adjust her
actions accordingly. This clocking in and clocking out made her
accountable for completing tasks. E. EVALUATING THE PLAN

Like so many clients, Claire had been stuck in a cycle of failed
responses to the symptoms dragging her down. Using new strategies to
address her ADHD symptoms was a revelation. Evaluating what she was
doing was also a striking, and difficult, new concept. It wasn't easy
for Claire to abandon her big clock and her myriad Post-it notes, none
of which helped her manage time. By nature she was rigid, she told me,
and she tended to adhere to an idea, even in the face of negative
results. Over time, she learned to match her coping strategies to her
strengths. Realizing that she responded to auditory cues, she added more
and more ideas to her repertoire. She set the alarm on her clock radio
to a music station, for example, and turned its volume so high that
she'd have to turn it down as soon as it sounded. She deliberately
placed the radio on the highest bookshelf in the front room near the
door, forcing her to move from wherever she happened to be at the moment
to turn the radio off. Then she would immediately grab the keys she had
placed on the same shelf and leave to pick up Lucy. None of it came
naturally to her, but evaluating her progress was worth the effort when,
several years later, her independent business had grown substantially.
The effort proved especially worthwhile when Lucy volunteered her mother
as chaperone on her senior class trip. "You're the best, Mom," she told
Claire. "I can't wait to have you with us in Washington." Telling me
about Lucy, Claire reminded me of the mission statement she had composed
shortly after we began coaching. "I will live my life in a way that
makes me, and my daughter, proud," it had read. No wonder Claire was
crying when she told me.

R. REPEATING THE PLAN

Like any other individual with ADHD, Claire had to remember, "I've been
down this road before!" She had to remember that she could be her own
worst enemy if she didn't continue to work her plan. The only way for
her, or anybody, to do so is to repeat, repeat, repeat. Claire learned
to keep the plan in place, regardless. She didn't always succeed, but
she learned to accept inevitable setbacks as part of being human. "I
Can't Do Everything in One Day!" Lucy had painted years ago on a sign
that still hangs in Claire's office. Claire admitted that she doesn't
always remember to read it, but she did learn to follow Lucy's cue. To
this day, those words are as necessary to Claire's functioning as the
sustaining love the words imply. "Say it, Mom," Lucy always begins,
whenever they talk on the phone. To which Claire always replies,
laughing, "I can't do everything in one day!" No one can. It is with
Claire's blessing that I share that belief with you. Strategies for
Those Who Mismanage Time Like Claire, you have to accept that your time
management challenges are more profound than those of most people. You
have ADHD, after all, and you're never going to change that fact, but
you can change its effects on your life by developing strategies to
manage it. Perhaps you can adopt Claire's strategies, the ones that
worked--- bookends and anchors, timers, multiple alarms---or, as Claire
told me, anything that is number based. Or perhaps you might prefer the
ones that didn't work for her but might for you---clocks, Post-it notes,
and calendars.

WITHIN THE BRAIN: IT'S ABOUT TIME

by John J. Ratey, M.D. In the brain, the attention system and motor
system are closely allied in their development and operation. Both, in
part, affect our ability to keep time and to keep our inner experience
feeling continuous.

The frontal lobe---more specifically, the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex---is commonly called the brain's CEO, which governs all our
"executive functions," including time management and working memory.
Owing to the ADHD brain's underarousal in the prefrontal area, the
ability to measure and estimate time is almost always compromised. In
addition to the frontal lobes, there are two areas critical to attention
and motor timing that impinge on the struggles with time that people
with ADHD have. The cerebellum, which I call the "rhythm and blues"
area, helps in making our movements smooth and rhythmic. Disturbances in
this area can challenge a person's ability to "be in flow," and they
experience time as choppy or discontinuous. The other area is the basal
ganglia, an area deep inside the brain thought mainly to handle
movements, especially automatic movement. In the attention system, it is
likened to an "automatic transition," helping us to shift smoothly from
idea to idea. Malfunctions in this area can result in "getting stuck" in
thought for hours or being unable to "shift" without the help of
external reminders.

Through trial and error, clients have created all kinds of strategies,
some of which might also give you ideas. SCHEDULE BREAKS

Hyperfocusing can create havoc when it comes to time management. Not
only does it mean that, with no regard to priorities, you'll wind up
doing one particular project at the expense of others, but it can also
contribute to low blood sugar and fatigue. Taking distinct breaks will
allow you to rejuvenate and to improve the quality of the work you've
already begun. The point is not to abandon what you've been doing, but
to return to it with renewed energy and focus. DESIGNATE STOP AND START
TIMES

Designating stop and start times means terminating one activity and
beginning another---stopping work on task A and starting task B. If you
don't designate stop times for activities, projects and tasks can
"bleed" into each other because time seems open-ended, which is not
helpful for someone with ADHD. USE THE "HALF IN HALF IN HALF" RULE

Chances are, the time that you actually allot to any given project is
often "wishful thinking," a setup for failure.

But there's a "golden rule" that can help you plan more effectively. For
any given time frame, take half of any given task, then cut that in
half, and cut that in half again. In other words, plan to do only a
fraction of what you would normally set out to do. Using this "half in
half in half" formula will help you maintain boundaries. And being more
realistic in your time estimates, you won't be setting yourself up for
failure. Set yourself up for success instead, and watch that success
multiply! MAKE AN APPOINTMENT WITH YOURSELF

If you keep appointments with others, why not make---and keep---
appointments with yourself? Designate "home office hours" to pay bills,
for example, or mark "Tuesdays at Ten" to plan the weekly meals.
Scheduling time in this way can help you see necessary activities and
the time in which you'll do them in the concrete terms all individuals
with ADHD need. MEASURE TIME

For three days, write down how long it takes to do routine
things---taking your shower, for example, or feeding the dogs. By
getting an idea of how long you spend on each, you can learn to
calculate the actual time it takes for other activities in your day.
Select four or five simple activities like eating breakfast or making
the bed, or the two I mentioned above. In your coaching notebook or
file, list the activities next to the left margin of a clean page. Then
make three columns across the page, dating each for three successive
days. On each day, use the stopwatch to time the length of each of the
activities you listed, not to beat the clock each day, but to see an
accurate picture of the time each task takes.

MEASURING TIME Morning Routine ACTIVITY

DAY 1---TIME

DAY 2---TIME

DAY 3---TIME

Shower Eat breakfast Get dressed Feed dogs

While it might seem that you're wasting time by measuring time, you most
definitely are not! Measuring time will help you estimate time in
planning your daily schedule. When you make a to-do list, write in some
of your daily activities first, knowing how long they should take. Then
set an alarm to sound at the time limit you've realistically designated
for each specific task. You'll get used to how long the typical, often
neglected, aspects of the day take. Then you're more likely to develop
the sense of time you need for other things. HEAR THE PASSING OF TIME

To help you learn how long an hour is, buy a sports watch and set it to
beep every hour on the hour. Gradually, by "hearing" the passing of
time, you'll become more conscious of not only time, but also the length
of an hour. There are many other alternatives if you don't want to use a
beeping watch. You can get one that vibrates, or you can use your PDA.
DIVIDE YOUR DAY INTO "QUADRANTS"

Many of my clients don't react well to detailed time management systems,
where they put a task next to a time. If you're like them, try dividing
your day into different sections and then plug into each section tasks
or goals you need to finish. For example, one client divides his day
into three blocks: 9-- 11, 11--2, and 2--5. This way, he knows what
things he needs to have accomplished by eleven, two, and five o'clock.
DON'T GET STUCK IN PLANNING

Because the only perfect system for time management is the one that
works for you, it's up to you to discover your own. To keep myself on
track, I have to write out---with a felt-tipped pen on a clean sheet of
paper---my top one

or two items for the next hour. I do this for every hour of the day on a
clean sheet of paper. I know I go through a lot of paper, but that's the
price I pay. It keeps me moving forward, and it keeps my eye on the
clock. It works for me, so maybe it will work for you, too! SEE BOTH THE
BIG AND LITTLE PICTURES

Keep a monthly calendar and a weekly calendar in tandem. This way, you
can keep the larger time frame in full view and monitor your weekly
commitments as well. All too often, people with ADHD get stuck in one
view or the other. Another choice is to post several months of
calendars, each clearly marked with monthly goals to reinforce the "big
picture" and to better "see" your time frame. BE ACCOUNTABLE FOR YOUR
TIME

Tell someone your goals for the day. Sharing what you want to do helps
make it happen, so be creative. Like many of my clients, I work from a
home office. One summer when I was having the house painted, I went
outside each day and told the painters that by noon I needed to do X, Y,
and Z and that if they saw me outside before noon, they should ask me if
I had completed X, Y, and Z. They took their job coaching me to heart,
and I got a lot done that summer! CREATE A SYSTEM OF STRUCTURED
FLEXIBILITY

Write out on a grid your "fixed" weekly obligations, or create a weekly
template. Under the appropriate day and time, place each activity or
task. Include work hours, your therapy appointment, your child's soccer
game--- anything that is mandatory and recurring. Next, designate the
remaining time that can be used for doing other tasks---"M, W, F: 9--12
AM and 3--5 PM," for example. These periods will become known as your
"flexible time zones." Make lists of all the weekly goals you have: Work
on projects ABC, pay bills, grocery shop, do laundry, and so on. Now
comes the fun part: Put each goal on a small Post-it note and start to
"plug" them into the flexible time zones.

The idea is to create a system of exchanges. If you don't "feel" like
doing project B on Monday morning, for example, but you're in the mood
to work on the expense report scheduled for Wednesday afternoon, you can
exchange these tasks. Just be sure to shuffle the Post-it notes as well,
so that the tasks and goals they represent don't disappear. Your grid
might look like this:

MONDAY

TUESDAY

WEDNESDAY

THURSDAY

FRIDAY

9--11 Flex Zone Gym

9--2 Flex Zone Project: B

9--2 Flex Zone Project: C

7--9 Bible Group

9--12 Flex Zone Gym

9:30--2 Flex Zone Meal Planning Groceries

1--2 Weekly Girls Lunch

3--6 Flex Zone Bills

12:00--1 PM Therapy

2:30 PM Kids Soccer

2:30 PM Kids Soccer

2:30 PM Kids Soccer

2:30 PM Kids Soccer

4--6 Flex Zone Project A

4--6 Flex Zone Gym

4--6 Flex Zone Laundry

4--6 Flex Zone Gym

Dinner

Dinner

Dinner

Dinner

LIST OF WEEKLY GOALS Work on Projects A, B, and C Pay Bills Meal
Planning Groceries Laundry Gym

Dinner

Whatever strategies you decide to implement, remember that the key is to
evaluate how they are working and to be flexible about changing the ones
that aren't working. Take the time to learn to manage time, and like
Claire, you can take control of your life! OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6

Procrastination

Being able to help Claire at the start of my career immediately
confirmed that I had chosen the right field, but I did wonder if any
other client's ADHD struggles would resonate as profoundly with me. I
needn't have worried. The ADHD brain doesn't conveniently designate one
symptom as the only symptom, and I soon learned that I could relate to
almost every problem experienced by those who came to me. So many
symptoms overlap that most clients---actually, most adults with
ADHD---can say along with me, "Yes, I get it, I've been there, I know
what you mean." In many ways, then, my clients and I are alike. But
although the motivation we have all felt to take control of our
respective lives might also be equal---we are adults, after all, aware
of the stakes involved when a life is out of control---I have been
spared the professional consequences that so many of them have endured.
Sam had been moderately successful in the corporate world, his annual
reviews attesting to his creative and innovative ideas and his many
efforts to improve performance. The caliber of his work, when finally
completed, was usually high, and presentations to potential clients were
energetic and engaging. People, including his bosses, genuinely liked
him. On the other hand, Sam always appeared on the verge of dismissal.
He was disorganized, the reviews noted. He disregarded details and
deadlines. He never seemed able to complete his work in advance.
Colleagues and even longtime clients and friends had christened him
"Last-Second Sam." Sam had survived the somewhat shaky evaluations of
his superiors for more than fifteen years, learning to content himself
with minor promotions

and occasional bonuses while younger employees surpassed him in both
status and compensation. Shortly after he turned forty, however, his
life, both professionally and personally, took the first of a series of
consequential turns when he attended what he'd expected to be a routine
"Meet the Teacher Night." "Have you considered having Matthew tested?"
his son's fifth-grade teacher asked before enumerating to Sam and his
wife, Molly, her concerns with Matthew's performance. Matthew was much
smarter than his report cards suggested, the teacher said. He could
never seem to buckle down to his work, even though he usually knew both
the answers and their explanations. He seldom completed classroom
assignments, yet the ones he occasionally did finish could be exemplary.
And although his energy and his good ideas should have made him a
natural leader, he would often say things that alienated his classmates,
who would then avoid or tease him. A Diagnosis for Sam Several weeks
after the parent-teacher conference, ten-year-old Matthew was diagnosed
with ADHD, and a few months later, Sam admitted to himself what he had
long tried to suppress: For as far back as he could remember, he'd been
exhibiting symptoms similar to his son's. Summoning his courage, he
decided to seek a diagnosis for himself, and the results were
conclusive. Like Matthew, Sam had ADHD, news he received with mixed
feelings. On the one hand, he could already see a slight, but
significant, difference in Matthew's performance once medication had
kicked in and his teacher had made adjustments in her planning for
Matthew's specific needs. Surely his own performance would improve, Sam
thought, and once his bosses noted his increased productivity, a
promotion would be forthcoming. On the other hand, he wanted to keep the
diagnosis to himself. Unlike Matthew's teacher, who, upon learning of
Matthew's ADHD, was actively seeking to help him in any way she could,
no one at work would be accommodating Sam if he didn't disclose his
ADHD. It would be up to him to focus and pace himself consistently,
something that he clearly did not know how to do, even with the
medication he'd been prescribed. (See medication table, page 231.)

One year later, convinced that his history of job performance precluded
any possibility of the advancement he desperately wanted, Sam left the
only company for which he had worked since earning his master's degree
in business administration years earlier. A lifelong friend had
suggested they establish a small business of their own, and Sam embraced
the opportunity for a fresh start, accepting the offer with enthusiasm.
Unfortunately, co-owning the business with Martin did nothing to change
Sam's performance. During periods of high energy, he could still dazzle
a client, but just as before, there was little predictability about when
such periods would occur. Too often, he gave in to his old ways:
lateness with proposals, lateness to meetings, spending too much time on
minor projects while major ones sat untouched. If anything, his old
habits had become more pronounced without colleagues and superiors to
urge him on. He was in his own start-up company, after all. When the old
pressures from above and the nagging dread of being fired and the tight
timelines demanded by colleagues all disappeared, so did any semblance
of order in Sam's day. House and yard projects that had lain untouched
for years appeared suddenly enticing, and Sam joyfully navigated the
aisles of Home Depot alongside retirees in their leisure, his thoughts
as far from impending deadlines as theirs seemed to be. If he never made
it into the office space he and Martin shared downtown, not the
slightest twinge of guilt disturbed his day. Martin provided little
impetus for a steadier pace from Sam. Long used to Sam's pulling it off
at the last second---as roommate, he had witnessed firsthand Sam's
all-nighters---he continued to believe that Sam could, and would, secure
the business equivalent of the college A's he had consistently earned.
Granting Sam the very freedom to procrastinate that would undermine
potential success, he'd assure Sam, "No problem, I know you'll come
through." As bookkeeper for the new venture, Molly had become keenly
aware of cash flow and debt, information that exacerbated an already
troublesome situation. Her growing discomfort about the couple's
financial security had deepened into an anxiety coloring every aspect of
the family dynamic, and she became tense and impatient with her
husband's "irresponsible ways." Disillusioned and out of answers, she
wondered what had become of her role as supportive wife.

For although she loved Sam no less than ever, Molly was increasingly
aware of the cost to their relationship that his perpetual
procrastinating, and his perpetual presence, had exacted. Even worse
than the broken swing and the chipped paint, the ripped screens and the
sagging floorboards---all the glaring messes that she had tolerated for
years---were his recent compulsions, now that he and Martin were their
own bosses, to take care of them. Yes, she blamed Sam for failing to do
"what every other husband around here does," but neither was there any
joy when he finally did. "Why would you choose now?" she demanded one
Sunday afternoon as Sam sawed happily away at oak branches dangling
overhead. "Don't you have a major presentation tomorrow morning?"
Startled out of sleep that night by a voice from the next room, Molly
found Sam rehearsing the pitch he'd be delivering six hours later. "You
can't keep working this way, Sam," she cried. "This is no good. What in
the world are we going to do?" Soon after, Sam called about coaching.
The A-N-S-W-E-R for Sam A. ACKNOWLEDGING THE ADHD

Like many other adults with ADHD, Sam had spent his life developing both
the habit of procrastination and the accompanying, finely tuned tactics
that nurtured it. Coaching could help him develop new habits, I
promised, but it would be up to him to acknowledge the role ADHD was
playing in his life. Sam knew he had ADHD, but for the most part, his
knowledge ended there. Once Matthew had been diagnosed, Molly had been
on a personal quest to understand as much as she could about how ADHD
was affecting her son, but she and Sam had rarely discussed it. For one
thing, Molly saw Matthew as more in need of her help than Sam, so she
concentrated her efforts on her child's ADHD, not her husband's. She
also wanted Sam to focus on one thing only. It was enough for him to
concentrate on work, she told him, especially after he and Martin had
begun their partnership. There would be time enough to learn more about
his ADHD once the business became profitable. But if he were going to
change the behavior that had led him to me in the first place, Sam could
not simply state, "I have ADHD," and expect life

to take care of itself. It wouldn't happen that way. The Art of
Procrastination

Who among us doesn't love the luxury of an occasional lazy afternoon,
putting off till tomorrow what we might have done today! We all do, of
course, but when people with ADHD procrastinate, they aren't feeling
momentarily lazy or giving in to a harmless, well-earned need to unwind.
Procrastinating might qualify as a justifiable indulgence or a rare,
sweet choice for the majority of people without ADHD, but for those
living with it, there is nothing sweet about it. It comes layered with
guilt and humiliation and an intuitive sense that you are letting others
down. By acknowledging his ADHD, Sam learned to admit that, for him,
procrastination was a significant problem with a biological base, not an
occasional reward for serious and consistent work or even the result of
a mood swing now and then. And although he could learn to compensate for
it, he could never change the biology in which his procrastination was
rooted. Quite simply, he would never have the freedom of choice about
certain issues that people without ADHD have. His choices were limited
to what he could do to compensate for what his brain propelled him to
do, not to the neurological structure of the brain itself. His ADHD
wouldn't go away, but the way he behaved because of it could. First, he
would have to plan his compensatory strategies. Once they began to work,
he could practice, practice, practice until they became, at last, a part
of his brain's machinery. Being A-Historic

Sam's ADHD meant that his continual procrastinating was intertwined with
both his ability to forget past actions and consequences and his
inability to think beyond the moment, what I call being "a-historic."
His brain's lack of working memory---its not remembering---meant he
easily forgot about not only deadlines, but also the consequences of
missing those deadlines. Trapped as he was in the present, Sam was
unable to hold in mind the memory of what had happened every other time
he had put something off. Instead, he focused on what was in front of
him at any given moment--- dead branches in need of removal, for
example---instead of on what past experience should have been reminding
him---if you are unprepared with a presentation, you will lose the
client, whose business you sorely need.

By distinguishing what was biological about his procrastinating and what
was merely adaptive, Sam could begin to make the changes he and Molly
needed. In other words, by learning to change the elements of behavior
that were within his control, he could change the outcomes as well,
improving the areas of life that had been the source of personal failure
and marital discord. Clearly, Sam wasn't trying to frustrate Molly by
repairing the porch swing when he should have been meeting with Martin.
He wasn't trying to humiliate himself or his partner by forgetting about
a client waiting for an answer. He wasn't lying when over and over again
he said he was sorry for his behavior. But stuck in a different moment,
he was forgetting the promises he had made of "never again, never." If
he could identify what caused him to forget, he could create strategies
to remember past consequences. Productive Procrastination

One of the problems for Sam was that he could easily ignore his original
goals and get lost in some other activity, usually something more fun or
trivial than what he'd initially set out to do. He knew that he would
eventually throw himself into work that needed to be done, so he
actually enjoyed this ability to hyperfocus. "I used to drive Martin
nuts when we were in college," he admitted. "Martin would work at his
papers way in advance while I played soccer or basketball, but I'd
always be the one getting the A's by doing the whole thing in one day. I
just wouldn't sleep the night before it was due. I'm surprised Martin
still even talks to me. He wouldn't get any sleep those nights, either,
but hey, it worked for me." On the other hand, Sam knew that his old
habit was beginning to prove his undoing. "I couldn't believe Molly was
so mad," he said, as he related the story of the hanging branches. "I
thought she'd be glad I was finally cutting them down. She'd been after
me for months, she was always complaining that somebody could get hurt
if one of the big ones fell during a storm." Then he sighed. "Who knew?"
I knew. I knew because I'd seen many other clients do exactly what he
was doing. This "productive procrastination" is a popular survival
tactic among my clients. They enjoy feeling busy, and they fool
themselves into thinking that

of course they are busy, they're not procrastinating, they're getting so
much accomplished, so how could anyone say they're not working? They
delude themselves into thinking, "Let me just do these other little
things first. That way I'll be able to focus completely on the important
thing because I won't have all this other stuff hanging over my head, so
I'll really do a better job." Good Stress/Bad Stress

When Sam said that he enjoyed the last-second approach that he was so
used to, I understood fully what he meant. Like him---and, on more
occasions than I care to admit, like me---procrastinators often wait to
begin a task until they've run out of time, until they have painted
themselves into that proverbial corner, literally creating the "high
stakes" situation that their brains need. Part of the problem for those
of us with ADHD is that the attention system of our brain is often
"sleepy" or lethargic when not fully aroused, so we go from stimulus to
stimulus, from issue to issue, seeking ever immediate gratification and
completely forgetting whatever it was that we were initially
considering. We can't sustain the interest and effort and ability to
focus on a single issue that, as adults, we're expected to have, so
we're on to the next idea before completing the original one. We're so
easily lured into unrelated activities, in fact, that people suspect our
motives, calling us irresponsible and lazy, undependable, and even
self-centered. Well, some of us probably are, just as some people
without ADHD are. We're human, after all, so we're subject to the same
human flaws as everybody else. For years, we've also been told we're all
those things, so some of us probably believe it, perpetuating the
selfdestructive myth even further. But for most of us, it's not
irresponsibility or laziness or selfishness that lies at the root of our
behavior. It's biology. And it's usually compounded by a lack of
understanding about how to compensate for it. "Stress Junkies"

We're called "stress junkies" with our need for high stimulation, but
it's that very stress that actually focuses us. With it, we somehow
prioritize better. We can suddenly sequence the steps we need to follow,
and we can sustain the effort we need to complete the task at hand. We
can stop "circling the airport," as one client put it, where "I see the
target, I know that I'm

circling, but I can't seem to land." With the right stress, we know that
we can land, so we seek the stimulation that allows us to do what we
must. Like anybody else, we like to feel good, and we choose reward over
punishment every time. The problem comes when we feel good about the
wrong things. Then the pleasure turns to pain when we realize we've
disappointed those we love and failed to live up to our best intentions.
Although it sounds paradoxical, good stress and an aroused attention
system help us make the decisions that usually frustrate us into
avoidance. When we can't imagine where to begin, we don't begin at all,
doing everything else that we can think of to avoid the pain of being
overwhelmed. Last-second stress turns us on, though, and in the frenzy
of the rush, we can suddenly make the choices that paralyzed us earlier.
How many term papers were written that way, how many exams passed, how
many guest rooms and bathrooms and patios renovated for guests about to
arrive? Being out of time has always forced people into action, but
those of us with ADHD have a whole personal history to remind us how we
get by. I Know What You Mean

As a professional coach, I've been invited to give hundreds of speeches
about adults with ADHD. Initially, I thought I could prepare for these
formal addresses the way I did for informal talks during my Harvard
years, when a few notes scribbled on napkins would get me through
lunchtime talks to three or four professionals struggling with their
ADHD symptoms. When the first invitation of my professional career
arrived in the mail, I was confident that I could do what I'd always
done: Just before addressing the group, I'd madly fill a few pages with
pertinent points, enough to hold the audience spellbound and make me
feel proud of what I'd accomplished. In the rush and excitement of the
moment, all the ideas would come tumbling out, and the most salient and
poignant and inspiring stories---the ones impossible to choose earlier,
the ones impossible to place in any order earlier---would be suddenly
obvious to my fully aroused ADHD mind! But facing an audience of
hundreds, I immediately froze, and in the long thaw of embarrassment
that followed, I resolved to spend as many months as necessary preparing
for the next engagement, if any other invitation were even forthcoming.
What I hadn't accounted for, of course, was the change in routine that
my status as professional now demanded. I had deeper obligations now,
and I would have to create new strategies to

fulfill them---planning and gathering information and rehearsing---no
matter how long and how painful that process might be. Sam and my other
clients had to learn the same lesson. What worked in the past needed to
stay in the past. Circumstances had changed, and if they were going to
gain the control of their lives they were seeking, they had to accept
the fact that they were no longer college students whose only
responsibility was completing assignments and passing classes. Now they
had spouses and children who depended on them. They had bosses and
partners and patients and clients to whom they were also responsible,
and procrastinating was not an option. N. NARROWING THE FOCUS

Breaking old habits is never easy. It takes time and persistence and
resiliency to do things differently from the way you've always done
them, especially when the old way was successful. Sam faced an even
bigger obstacle, though. His procrastinating on one task was usually
offset in his mind by the work he was doing on another, so he was
confused about both Molly's feelings and his own. "I always feel busy,"
he told me. "It's not like I'm sitting around doing nothing. I don't get
it why Molly complains. What does she think I'm doing?" Then he paused
for a minute before adding, "I wonder what I am doing!" Prioritizing
Thoughts and Actions

The most difficult part of the A-N-S-W-E-R for Sam might have been
narrowing the focus in the first place. Learning to prioritize his
thoughts enough to know what to work on in coaching was hard work.
Procrastinators put things off because of the frustration of not knowing
where to begin. Tasks and projects are circular in their minds, almost
like the knights at King Arthur's Round Table, I often say, each knight
as important and necessary as the next, none receiving more or less
attention than the other. With that kind of thinking, it's impossible to
keep track of priorities, since everything becomes as important as
everything else. But before he could develop strategies for controlling
his procrastination, Sam had to decide the areas needing greatest
attention. Doing Anything Else But . . .

In one of our earliest sessions, I asked Sam to recall, if he could, the
events of the weekend leading to Molly's eruption. What was he doing
when he wasn't working on the client presentation due the following
Monday morning? "There was other stuff, you know," he began, hoping
perhaps that I'd accept a vague response and move on. Coaching wouldn't
be helpful if it were that easy, I assured him, so I pressed on until he
became specific. I also asked him to make a list as he spoke. "Well, I
knew I'd need extra computer paper," he said, "so I went to Staples
early Saturday morning. I got a few pens there, too, and a lamp for my
desk to replace the one that was all rusty. Molly hated it, but I told
her not to replace it because I wanted to pick out my own. Sometimes I
don't like . . ." Then he paused, getting back to Saturday's activities.
"The nursery Molly likes is about a mile from Staples, so I stopped
there before I came home. Molly had been talking about wanting me to
plant lilacs near the front porch, and, yeah, I remember surprising her
with some. She really was surprised, too, because she thought I forgot
about that, but anyway, I got the lilacs, but I forgot to buy peat moss,
so I know I had to go out later to get some because after I dug the
holes, I couldn't just leave them till the next day that way." By the
time the coaching session ended, Sam had a list including Staples, the
nursery, Home Depot, the gas station, the local hardware store, and an
all-night convenience store for peroxide he needed when he cut his
finger late Sunday while attempting to replace a cartridge in his
printer. The list also included church, the bakery, the delicatessen,
the local pizza store, a beverage outlet, and Home Depot yet again. "Oh,
yeah," he remembered. "I went back to Home Depot again Sunday. I needed
a new saw to get those branches down." "Is there anything on the list
that wasn't essential that weekend?" I asked. "Was there anything you
didn't have to do while you weren't working on your presentation?" Like
so many procrastinators, Sam had been drawn into countless unrelated
pursuits when he should have been doing what he'd been promising his
partner for days. "Not to worry," he'd told Martin daily

during the prior week. "I have all weekend free. I'll have plenty of
time, so I'll do the whole thing then." What Sam clearly saw was that he
could have had the whole weekend free, but that despite his awareness of
the need to get started on his client work---despite his intended
goal---he had allowed himself to be busy with everything else. He was
repeating the history with which he was so familiar and so comfortable,
running from task to task in order to avoid a primary source of
frustration, the goal he dreaded to begin. "And why not run away from
what you hate and straight toward what you like?" any procrastinator
might ask. "Who would choose pain when there's pleasure to be had?" The
point, I reminded Sam, was to learn to derive pleasure from the
appropriate source. Self-Inhibiting

Sam needed to learn a new technique with which to confront
procrastination, the art of self-inhibiting. He needed to screen out
competing thoughts so he could focus on his primary goal, which meant
that he couldn't let impulsive thoughts turn into self-defeating
actions. Doing that also meant becoming more self-aware, not an easy
task for someone who had taken self-deception to unprecedented heights.
The list he drew up in our coaching session was step one. Step two was
turning such a list into a habit. He could begin, I said, by writing
down on Saturday and Sunday mornings a primary goal for each of those
two days, followed just before bed by a list of what he actually did,
similar to the one he had made for me. Sam should have known, of course,
that Molly didn't require the lilacs on the very weekend before his
major presentation was due. He should have known that she could hate the
lamp on his desk for one more week or even that, with no storm warnings
in the foreseeable future, he could probably wait a few more days to
remove branches. Seeing in black and white where his time was going
should make him more adept at self-inhibiting, I promised. Then, once he
became aware of the things tempting him off course, he could begin to
create strategies to address them. It would take effort to make the
lists, and it might be even

more difficult to look honestly at how he spent his time, but the reward
of changing his life for the better would be worth it. S. STRATEGIZING

One of the most striking things that came out of the early coaching
session with Sam was his reaction to the list I asked him to make. He
enjoyed recalling for me the weekend activities that preceded our
initial meeting, and in their telling he was funny, reflective, and
sincere. Of course everyone genuinely liked him, I thought. He was also
startled when he saw those activities in print. "I had no idea I got so
much done," he said. "Too bad I couldn't have put all that time into
what I was supposed to be doing." Creating Accountability

"I hate asking anybody for help," Sam said. "Molly tells me it's a male
thing, but I don't know. I'd just rather do things myself. She keeps
saying, 'C'mon, Sam, why don't you let me, why don't you ask Martin.' I
know it's because she really loves me and all, but . . ." But being
accountable to someone else has kept many of my clients on track,
especially when they choose someone about whom they really care. Because
they enjoyed the comfort of shared history, Sam and Martin had always
accepted each other's strengths as well as weaknesses, and they could
dismiss qualities that others might criticize with "That's just who he
is." They trusted each other implicitly, and Sam quickly saw the
potential benefits of accountability. By revealing to Martin that he had
ADHD, he could also ask Martin for help in accomplishing goals. Sam
hated to disappoint his friend, and if Martin were privy to the goals he
set, Sam believed he would try harder to accomplish them. Creating a
Competitive Edge

After opening up to Martin about his ADHD and his habit of
procrastination, Sam asked his friend to serve as his accountability
partner, someone with whom Sam could discuss both his goals and his
progress in meeting them. Martin agreed to Sam's request, and in a
"brilliant flash" a few months later---a throw-back to their old
teammate days, Sam said--- Martin upped the ante in their partnership.
What if they sat down each

Friday after work and compared notes, he suggested. Whoever had
completed less work that week would owe the other person dinner. The
minicompetition helped Sam to keep the most important accounts at the
forefront of his mind and guaranteed he wouldn't procrastinate in
beginning them. And as he continued to set manageable goals, establish
timelines, and define milestones, he was creating a new habit along the
way. Chunking It Down

Like many of my clients who can see the forest but not the trees, Sam
had trouble seeing the individual parts of major projects. In
recognition of the difficulty he faced when tasks appeared daunting, he
decided that he would try chunking---breaking down the large tasks into
smaller ones and setting goals for completing each individual segment.
For one thing, by creating more manageable goals, he was likely to feel
good when he accomplished them. He readily admitted that most of his
procrastinating stemmed from being overwhelmed when he faced the
prospect of a major project. Smaller chunks of work would be more
doable, and before he knew it, an entire project---a whole forest of
individual trees---could be completed. Chunking could also help Sam
develop the new habit of success he needed to keep him focused on his
primary goal. First of all, he would learn to accomplish important tasks
without creating the last-second stress that had traditionally seen him
through. And because he would be establishing specific, doable goals
each day, he'd be cultivating another new habit as well. Maximizing the
Environment

Keeping their goals in mind has been a challenge for most of my clients.
Listing what they want to accomplish is one thing. Seeing to it is
another. Sam continued to check in with Martin at work and with Molly at
home ---he had also asked Molly to help him be accountable---but he had
to learn to track his own progress. First, he wrote his goals with big
colored markers on a monthly calendar and posted it over his desk, where
he could see it throughout the day. Eventually, he learned to widen his
perspective by posting a twelvemonth calendar in his office at work and
in the one at home. With colored markers, he mapped out the next twelve
months of projects, with all the associated responsibilities and
deadlines he could determine in advance. He

created visual landmarks and accountability with Martin and Molly, and
by talking out his actions and plans with them, he learned to keep his
priorities in mind. He used screen savers, too, reminding him, "Remember
That Deadline!" and Post-it notes that he placed on the TV remotes and
bathroom mirrors, even on the dashboard of his car. His environment
became a virtual conscience, visual cues positioned like sentries around
him to keep him on task! Identifying Barriers

Sam discovered that keeping lists worked well for him, so he regularly
reviewed his day with a list of what he'd done. What he saw were
patterns of behavior, specifically the causes of his falling off course.
He loved surprising Molly, for example, so he could find almost any
excuse for being at the mall or at the downtown jewelry store or at the
garden centers Molly was always visiting, and once there, he could find
a hundred other things to grab his interest. It was difficult to change
that particular habit, but by seeing how often he'd made unplanned stops
at Molly's favorite places, and by talking with her about it, he
realized that he had been doing it more for himself than for her. "I
know you like to surprise me, Sam," she told him one day, "so I never
said anything before, but I think I'd rather be with you when you pick
out things for me. I never told you before because I didn't want to hurt
your feelings. What I really want is for you to keep focused the way
you've been doing lately. That's the most important thing to me." It
took a while for Sam to process Molly's honesty, but in the end, he
realized she wasn't being unkind or insensitive. She was being truthful,
which they had both vowed to be if they were going to change their lives
into something not just livable, but lovable. Ultimately, it was Sam's
lists that had propelled them to that point. He saw the kinds of things
that lured him from his goals; now he could implement strategies to keep
him on course. W. WORKING THE PLAN

Sam could easily fall prey to his need for immediate gratification, and
when the plan he had made faltered, as plans inevitably do, he had to be
diligent

and steadfast in pursuing it. He'd have to look at his visual cues, for
example, and do what they said. He'd have to avoid those shopping
centers and Home Depot aisles that enticed him, and he'd have to be
honest about what he needed to do. No matter what, no matter when, Sam
had to work the plan, stick to the plan, and not change the plan when he
just didn't feel like doing it. To convince him he wasn't alone in
attacking what he'd normally choose to avoid, I told him about packing.
Years ago, I developed a ritual when it came to packing for trips, which
had always driven me into such paralysis that I needed to begin the
process at least two weeks in advance of any flight. Up came the
suitcase from the basement, and down it went in the middle of the
bedroom floor, where I'd circle it daily, pretending that it wasn't
sitting at attention like a prison guard, waiting. Days would pass, and
still it stared, empty until the night before the trip---way into the
night before the trip, actually, even until the wee hours of the
morning, a few hours before I'd be taking off. I'd do everything else
connected to being away, of course. I'd check the luggage locks, I'd
label the keys, I'd label the work files I'd be taking along. I'd write
notes---endless notes---to the dog sitter, I'd clip the dogs' toenails,
I'd clip my own toenails. Meanwhile, the questions would spin. What will
the weather be? What mood will I be in? What will I want to wear? When
will I exercise? Should I take shampoo or conditioner, neither, or both?
Should I carry on a bag or check it in? But because I couldn't face the
decisions the questions demanded, I delayed and delayed the frustration
and pain of making them until the time came when I was out of time and I
had no choice but to decide. But until that last possible second,
weighing all the options was overwhelming. I had to consider shoes,
socks, hose, underwear, sweaters, skirts, slacks, toothbrush, makeup,
hair products, computer. "Why don't I just take the whole house!" I'd
scream to my husband. "It'll make my life easier!" But I'm the coach,
and because I can't preach without practicing, I couldn't just shrug and
give up. I had to work and work at being able to pack, so I've managed
to create a strategy that I---and my husband---can almost live with!

I still drag the suitcase from the basement two weeks early, but now,
each time I pass, I drop into it one category of clothing---running
clothes one day, dresses the next, robe after that---until at last
everything's there. All I have to do the day before I leave is fold the
clothes and arrange them neatly. I also keep a permanently packed
toiletries case, complete with hair dryer and traveling iron, just in
case, and I restock it the day after I return home. That way it's always
ready to go, and I can just take it on the next trip, no decisions
necessary. The strategy probably sounds crazy, but it gets me where I
need to go. Did I almost cancel a few trips rather than suffer through
the agony that preceded them? Of course. But the point is, I didn't. I
pushed through. I worked the plan, and I worked it again. And the other
point is this: The only way you can make progress and move forward is to
keep working, the same way that I have to. E. EVALUATING THE PLAN

Stuffing the suitcase while the driver honked in the driveway, dropping
things I'd grabbed as I ran out the door, running back one last time for
the forgotten cell phone---I knew there had to be a better way! And if I
ever wanted to lose my dread of traveling, I had to devise one. My
emotional well-being, not to mention my career, depended on it. This
evaluating phase of the A-N-S-W-E-R was just as necessary for Sam. It
helped him slow down and take stock of his tendencies, and it also
helped him realize his gains, especially when he began to derive
satisfaction without the high stress on which he had usually relied. He
also discovered what didn't work. The auditory cues that so many other
clients have chosen weren't effective for Sam. He had timers he never
set, but he looked at his calendars all the time, so he realized that he
responded best to visual cues and learned to strategize accordingly. The
process of discovery is ongoing, so Sam had to endure the same
trial-anderror process that we all do. Mostly, he had to remember why he
had come to coaching in the first place. He wanted to change. Sam had to
take this evaluating step of the A-NS-W-E-R to heart, even when doing so
was frustrating. R. REPEATING THE PLAN

Repeating the process might be the most difficult part of the
A-N-S-W-E-R for you if procrastination is your primary ADHD challenge.
You've spent years delaying the frustration of projects that overwhelm
you, after all, and performing tasks and chores that, objectively
speaking, were probably not a waste of time and that definitely were
rewarding. In a different context, for example, Sam's planting of lilac
bushes could have been fun and satisfying. It could have been received
by Molly as an act of love, a way of beautifying their property, instead
of as the source of tension that it became when it was done at the
expense of a more important task. If you're like many of my clients, it
might be difficult for you to eliminate an old habit that, objectively
speaking, appears just fine. Think of it this way: It's one thing to
resolve never to engage in blatantly bad behavior, like lying to your
spouse or using vulgar language with your child. It's objectively
negative by any standards, so of course you should eliminate it. It's
quite another thing to understand why you shouldn't plant lilacs.
They're pretty and they make you feel good and they can last for
generations. Maintaining the resolve to change objectively benign
behavior like that seems paradoxical. It means learning an entire new
source of motivation and an entire new feeling of reward. It means
learning a new habit and then relearning it again and again. But to
reach the point of self-initiating changes and to progress beyond
self-destructive patterns of behavior, you'll need to repeat, repeat,
repeat the process that allows you to do just that. It's critical to
remember that momentary successes never translate automatically into
permanent gains and that ongoing success will be built on structuring,
strategizing, and working the plan. It's also important to stay focused
on the big picture. Everything can seem interesting to procrastinators
with ADHD, so you'll have to keep the right priorities in mind, updating
your strategies to match your changing goals. Sam was fortunate, in a
sense, because the lists that he enjoyed making kept him honest. He
could see exactly what he had determined as his goal and then see
exactly what he did or didn't do to achieve it. The most common pitfall
for any adult with ADHD is forgetting you have it, so, like Sam, you'll
always have the challenge of remembering that

your ADHD won't go away. Even as you celebrate your successes, you'll
have to remember to pay attention each day. It helps to have others in
your corner cheering you on. "Molly and Martin have been great," Sam
told me more than once. "Sometimes I just don't feel like sticking with
the list and paying attention to schedules. I feel like just doing what
I want to do, end of discussion! But then I look at them and I know how
much they want me to succeed and I remember how much I want that, too.
So I grit my teeth and dig in."

WITHIN THE BRAIN: THE ART OF PROCRASTINATION

by John J. Ratey, M.D. Impaired executive functions in the frontal
lobes, in particular erratic working memory and a faulty attention
system, contribute to procrastination. Working memory can be likened to
the RAM of a computer. Without sufficient RAM, the brain moves on to the
next issue or stimuli, completely wiping clean what was being considered
before. Despite the awareness of the importance of getting started, the
ability to procrastinate is often intertwined with the sometimes amazing
ability of people with ADHD to forget, suppress, and repress their
desired goals and "get busy" with some other activity, regardless of how
meaningless it might be. Trapped in the moment, the person forgets even
painfully catastrophic consequences paid in the past for their avoidance
and procrastination. The double-edged sword of procrastination for
persons with ADHD is that so often they are able to "pull it off at the
nth hour." By activating cortisol, the body's stress response and stress
hormone, dopamine, the primary neurotransmitter of the attention system,
is released. This serves to correct the lethargic attention system and
"turn on" the frontal cortex, which improves RAM and all the other
executive functions. The person then is able to become focused and
sustain the effort and attention to start and complete tasks. This is
why individuals with ADHD develop the false belief that they will always
be able "to pull it off." This works well until the complexity of their
demands increases, and then they begin to fail.

One way or another, you'll have to dig in, too! Strategies for
Procrastinators

You can try any of Sam's strategies as a start---chunking, creating
accountability partners, engineering the environment, and identifying
barriers. Or try any of the following, again with your own touches added
to suit your personal circumstances. KEEP THE GOAL IN MIND

One of the hardest struggles for my clients is keeping their goals in
mind. If you can't see your goals, you'll be more likely to get off
track. Devise methods to keep the goal in mind and to see, and track,
progress. Mark your goals, the way Sam did, with colored markers on a
monthly calendar and post it where you will see it throughout the day,
in the kitchen, perhaps, or over your workstation or desk. CO-COACH YOUR
WAY FORWARD

Find someone who has similar goals and work out a co-coaching
relationship. Both of you, however, must be willing to do the following:
• Set up mutual goals and guidelines for the relationship. • Be sure the
co-coaching includes only what is appropriate. If it's about work, stick
to work issues. • Be consistent in your contact with your coaching
partner. • Be honest and open to suggestions, and trust your coaching
partner to have your best interests in mind. SEPARATE THE SETUP FROM THE
TASK

Eliminate the confused feeling of "Where do I start?" by separating the
setup from the actual task. For example, place a blank Word document
with the title "Year-End Report" on your computer desktop, but don't
start the report until later. You can do the same for paying bills by
stamping and addressing envelopes at one time but writing the checks and
mailing them later. Doing the setup as a separate task can make the task
less daunting. ESTABLISH AND MEET THE MINIMAL GOAL

Start by defining the smallest possible goal that will accomplish
something meaningful on the project or task. Call this the "minimal"
goal and schedule a time to complete it. At the scheduled time, do only
what you stated as

minimal, even if it's simply opening up a file and looking at the
project for ten minutes. That's what I mean by minimal! This allows you
to approach a tiny aspect of the project without becoming overwhelmed.
LIMIT TIME SPENT ON MAKING PLANS

Do you tend to spend hours making detailed plans with the best of
intentions but never seem to get around to implementing them? Set a
timer for ten minutes and allow yourself to write down only the basic
things you need to do, not every single detail. Work on daily goals
rather than scheduling every single minute. Then get moving! USE REWARDS
AS GOOD STRESS

Most of my clients work well under pressure, so try to use this insight
in a positive way. Set a lunch or dinner date with a friend, or plan to
go to a movie. Tell your friend you can't go until you've finished three
hours of work on your project or until you've cleaned your house, for
example, and say that if you don't finish, you must cancel. This is not
meant to be a punitive exercise, but one to fire you up to get the work
done. CREATE FALSE DEADLINES

If you're avoiding starting a long-term project, find someone you
respect (and fear a little!) and set several mini deadlines for handing
in parts of the work. It can be your supervisor, your boss, or a trusted
adviser. For example, tell the person, "I'll turn in a draft of the
first part of the report by next week." Many times, this "false
deadline" can stimulate you enough to get the work done. This strategy
needs to be used carefully because it's meant to create positive energy,
not make you more stressed, so be realistic and don't overpromise! USE A
WITNESS

Clients often benefit from the mere presence of someone to help them
start or complete a task. This seems to work well with tasks that have
been put off for a long while or that are emotionally charged, such as
doing the income taxes or clearing the house of clutter. Many of my
clients don't need

the person to help them with the actual task. Just making the
appointment and having them show up to sit in the same room with them is
enough. USE A MODEL

If you are asked to write a report or do a project and are stuck, get a
sample or a model to work from. This will help you see the end product
so you'll know what is expected of you. It is a tangible way of having
your goal in sight. BEWARE PRODUCTIVE PROCRASTINATION

A majority of my clients fool themselves into thinking they're being
productive by getting other projects of lesser importance off their
plates first. Generally speaking, they can be incredibly productive
doing everything but what they are supposed to be doing. Beware! You are
fooling yourself. Understand that much of this has to do with a sense of
immediate gratification. See it for what it is. Use those small projects
as rewards for actually working on your most immediate priority. MATCH
PEAK PERFORMANCE WITH PRIORITY PROJECTS

Do you know your "peak performance" time of day? When do you get the
most work done? When are you the most focused? Know whether you're a
"morning," an "afternoon," or an "evening" person, and be sure to have
your most important project in front of you at your best time. If you
don't, you're apt to do a task of lesser importance and exhaust your
energy that way. I've had clients who were morning people but who ended
up regrouting their showers or balancing their checkbook during peak
performance time. One devised a computer program that he wanted to
market to banks, all the while putting his actual job in jeopardy. YOU
BECOME THE FIRST THING YOU DO IN THE MORNING

A well-known author and friend of mine once said to me, "You become the
very first thing you do in the morning," meaning that if you do the
thing that is most important to your career each morning, first thing,
and if you make doing this a habit, you'll be successful.

Take this advice to heart, as I did. It has definitely worked for me in
the writing of this book, and it has worked for many of my clients. It
will work for you! REMEMBER THE PAIN OF THE PAST

A typical pattern my clients fall into is saying to themselves, "Let me
clear my desk of other work first, then carve out time over the weekend
for project X," when history dictates that every time they do this, they
put X off until the night before it's due. This tactic might have worked
in high school, but you know it's not serving you anymore. Know that
your brain will fool you in the moment and convince you that this time
you'll actually accomplish it. Ask others around you to remind you of
the pain of the past. It's one way you can stop this self-destructive
cycle. MAKE ACTIONS CONCRETE

Goals and plans are only wishes unless you establish a "when" for each
individual step and action. Be specific on the breakdown of the steps
you plan to take and the times you plan to do each one. Set a clear time
and day for the completion of each. ALWAYS HAVE A BACKUP PLAN

It's typical for my clients to sabotage their first set of plans and
then to give up completely. Don't let that happen! When you mark out a
schedule with start times and days to begin working on the project, set
up several backup times so you can't escape starting work. For example,
set a start time/day of Tuesday at 11:00 A.M. with a backup of Tuesday
at 2:00 P.M., and then the do-or-die start time/day of Tuesday at 4:00
P.M. SHARE YOUR GOALS!

Tell someone about your goals for the day. Sharing what you want to do
helps in making it happen. Accountability can create the necessary
motivation and help you to be more consistent. CREATE "SAFE" HIGH STAKES
FOR YOURSELF

This is a Nancy Ratey special. I used this strategy many times in the
writing of this book, and I can say it really works!

People with ADHD often wait until they've boxed themselves into a corner
before they finally start a project. I know this about myself, so I've
used the knowledge to my advantage. I take my laptop computer and drive
to a parking lot or to a park bench. I turn on my computer and basically
play a game of chicken with myself. I sit there staring at the battery
drain, and without fail, when it hits 73 percent, my brain kicks in and
I start to write like a maniac until the battery drains. Then I head
home. Doing this always guarantees me roughly two hours of writing!
UNDERSTAND WHY YOU CIRCLE THE AIRPORT

Some of my clients describe their tendency to avoid long-term projects
as "circling the airport." They know what they need to do, and they
understand the importance of starting, but they just can't seem to
"land." What ensues is a cycle of self-loathing that perpetuates the
"circling." Understand what this is about. For some, it's an issue of
not knowing where to start. For others, it's an issue of dreading what
it will take to get the task completed---hours, if not days, of making
up for having put it off. Simply knowing this can help you cut yourself
off at the pass before you start to panic and circle again and again.
TAKE A PAGE FROM SAM'S BOOK

Sam's lists were his most important strategy, so they could work for
you, too. Keep it simple in the beginning. Each day you're off from
work, start the day by writing down your primary goal. At the end of the
day, list as many things as you remember doing that day and put a check
next to each one that was connected to your goal. It will give you a
clear picture of the relationship of your goals to your actions. It will
also show you the kinds of things that pull you off course, so you can
learn to identify barriers.

It bears repeating that the only "best" strategies are the ones that
work for you individually, so what is most effective will probably be
what you create

on your own. If something seems "almost there," modify it until it's
exactly right in your own life. And don't forget that trial and error
will reveal what's best, which means don't give up! OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 7

Impulsivity

Years ago, I was surprised when a client told me that during the
twenty-odd years since he'd graduated from college, he had worked for
eight different companies. "Yeah, I told my manager to shove it," was
how he described the latest time he'd been fired. "And he told me
good-bye. Too bad I'm so used to it." Unfortunately, stories like his no
longer surprise me. Many of my clients have gone from job to job, let go
each time by employers no longer willing to overlook offensive actions
and speech directed at clients, colleagues, and the bosses themselves.
Sadly, these individuals have often been highly intelligent and skilled,
in many ways so well suited for their jobs that success should have been
automatic. What they've lacked has been a way to keep from saying and
doing things so inappropriate that dismissal was their employers' only
option. When James, a relatively young client, told me a similar story,
I knew that he was fortunate in at least one sense. He had only just
turned thirty. Time was on his side, and with the right commitment and
attitude, he could take control of his life. One of the first things
James said to me was, "If I could only keep my big mouth shut." He went
on to paint a picture of a life beset by inappropriate behavior and
mired in paradox. Young and independent, he was also handsome, athletic,
and outgoing, a Wall Street trader on the fast track. He already owned a
condo, a vacation club share in the Rockies, and a new sports car that
he'd purchased for cash.

On the surface, he appeared rich and enviable and on the way up, the
whole world within his grasp. He also loved his work, especially its
intensity and pace, and though he'd been fired a few days previously, he
was confident that he'd be back in another position soon. "That's not
the problem," he assured me. "I know I'll get another job. I'm good at
what I do, I really am. I swear I was probably responsible for about 40
percent of their accounts. I didn't get fired for bad work. I cursed at
my boss in front of a lot of people again, and there was no way he was
keeping me after that. I get it." What he couldn't get was what made him
act the way he did in the first place; why he said things that people
found uncouth and offensive; why a former fraternity president and
popular superjock couldn't keep a girlfriend for more than a few months
while most of his old friends were settling down with spouses and
children; why someone who'd already made "so much money that it's
obscene" kept losing too much of it in casinos; why somebody who could
make quick, lucrative trades on the floor of the stock market couldn't
manage his own credit cards or save more than a few thousand dollars.
"What's up?" James wanted to know. "In the last two weeks, I lost my
job, I got another notice from the condo association for parking in
somebody else's spot, I sprained my ankle skiing, and Beth broke up with
me. And, oh yeah, I forgot my mom's birthday on top of everything else,
and now she's all hurt and mad at me." Impulsivity By his own admission,
James was displaying some of the classic characteristics of ADHD,
specifically an inability to control his impulsivity. "What's with
people?" he asked, speaking about his social life. "What do they want,
anyway? I see myself with a couple of kids someday, maybe a house at the
beach, but, hey, I'm not ready to settle down yet. Women--- they want
you to check in every day, they want to know what you'll be doing six
weeks from now, six years from now, and why don't you come meet their
mother in Minnesota after you've only just met them. All these women in
the city are so boring, they're all the same. Nobody just wants to

do something without a million plans first, and it's like they want you
to try out for some Mr. Perfect prize. Nobody knows how to have fun
anymore." Clearly, James was unable to understand that the frat boy
behavior that had made him so popular in high school and college had
worn thin. Old friends still included him when the Knicks or Jets or
Mets were in town, but unable to predict what he might do or say next,
especially after several drinks, few accompanied him on the ski
vacations or fishing trips he often took, and no one invited him to
gatherings including their wives and children. They weren't willing to
take a chance on James when their families were involved. Turned off by
his excessive spending or rude remarks, newer acquaintances, especially
women, were even less likely to last. At first he might seem charming
and energetic and charismatic, but relationships usually ended abruptly
when he was "loud, over-bearing, and obnoxious, always the center of
attention," a description Beth had recently invoked in ending their
relationship. Other times, he simply got bored. The thrill of the hunt
invigorated him, not the day-to-day commitment and empathy that invited
intimacy. Interestingly, this acting in the moment, quickly and
immediately and without deliberation, served James well professionally,
and his employers truly valued his ability to make instant trades and
execute deals. At the same time, though, they considered him a
professional risk, a constant liability who at any moment might lose his
temper with a client or coworker. Trapped in the moment at any given
time, he also regularly failed to complete paperwork required by
industry standards, and his boss was sick of hearing James's excuses and
empty promises to follow through. "I hate all the rules," James said. "I
don't even know what they are most of the time anyway, and if I do, I
usually forget them at the wrong times because to tell you the truth,
they bore me. Why do I need them, anyway? Everybody knows how good I
am." The A-N-S-W-E-R for James Much of what James said in that initial
interview troubled me, because I knew that if coaching were to make a
difference for him, he would have to start assuming responsibility for
his actions. At that point, everything was

somebody else's fault: His friends were stick-in-the-muds, women were
boring, his bosses had too many rules. According to James, he certainly
wasn't the "real jerk" that Beth had called him. Everybody else was. A.
ACKNOWLEDGING THE ADHD

Probably the most important issue for James was acknowledging the
reality that his problems would not go away by themselves and that it
was going to take hard work on his part to change things. First of all,
he had to admit several facts about his behavior: (1) He had an extreme
attraction to instant gratification and high stimulation, regardless of
consequences; (2) he never stopped to think before he acted or spoke;
(3) he was constantly driven to increase the "intensity" in situations
that were otherwise boring to him. Added to these problems were (4) an
overreliance on intuition, and (5) an inability to learn from his
mistakes. Impulsivity was wreaking havoc with his life, and he needed to
face up to the fact that he'd been deceiving himself. His quick wit had
helped him succeed thus far, but he'd been equally dependent on
adrenaline, a formula that couldn't last. He'd gotten as far as he could
without a clearly identified long-term goal and a plan to achieve it.
Now it was time to learn how ADHD was affecting his functioning and to
take action to address it. What Is Impulsivity?

Impulsivity is a lack of the brain's self-inhibiting function. In
simpler terms, it's an emotional response to the world characteristic of
childhood, rather than a rational response---one that includes
deliberation, judgment, and reflection---characteristic of adulthood.
Instead of thinking about their intended actions or weighing the
consequences sure to follow, James and people like him leap before they
look, with neither foresight nor hindsight to guide them. Those who
manifest impulsivity lack impulse control---a way for their minds to
"put the brakes on." Without a cognitive response to a stimulus---
without working memory or judgment or a way to evaluate consequences---
they find it impossible not to speak their minds in the moment, and they
often blurt things out, interrupt, or even finish other people's
thoughts for them, eliciting a lot of resentment along the way. True, it
might be refreshing to hear somebody speak without a script once in a
while, but it's also disconcerting to be on the receiving end of an

unfiltered rant. Nobody likes it, and few adults are willing to put up
with it. Nor are they willing to endure indefinitely the company of
someone who constantly draws attention to him- or herself. To put it
bluntly, that kind of behavior becomes embarrassing, if not exhausting,
to be around. Specifically, then, unless he began to understand what was
causing his behavior, and until he created strategies to compensate for
his impulsivity, James would continue to jeopardize any chance of
acquiring new, long-term relationships of any kind. Whatever job he had
at a given moment would also be in constant jeopardy, and money problems
would continue to haunt him because of excessive spending and frequent
gambling. If his impulsivity remained unaddressed, his struggles would
be seen as character flaws or a lack of desire to change and improve. He
definitely wanted to be married someday, but unless he took action to
change his behavior, it was unlikely he'd ever find a lifelong mate. In
fact, James needed to understand that his neurobiology was at the root
of his struggles. Acknowledging that his ADHD was causing---and,
unchecked, would continue to cause---real problems was James's first
step in understanding what he needed to do to help himself. What Causes
Impulsivity to Persist?

One of the most difficult struggles for people with ADHD is being stuck
in the perpetual "now." James was unable to learn from past experiences
in order to evaluate the potential consequences of present or future
ones. Every situation was therefore something new, and his reactions
were based solely on the moment in which he found himself. It's not
unlike the person who continues to touch the lit burner on the stove,
even though he's been burned every other time he's done the same thing.
There's nothing in his head saying, Hey, wait. Don't touch. You don't
want to get burned again. Unable to remember that he'd already been
fired from one position because of swearing at his boss, James repeated
the same behavior, with the same results. It wasn't that he literally
didn't remember his past actions. He knew full well that he'd been fired
before, and he knew precisely why. But in the moment, as the new
situation unfolded around him and his boss reprimanded him for not
following company policy, his working memory of consequence failed, and
he responded to that particular event with nothing from past experience
to guide him: You cursed at your boss before. You got fired for it.

That's what happens to individuals with ADHD. In any given moment, they
can't keep in mind the idea of the past or the idea of a future---that
tomorrow or even an hour from now will actually exist. Mistakes don't
get "cemented" in memory in the ADHD brain, so there is no plan in place
to prevent new mistakes---mistakes just like the old ones---from
happening yet again. The same thing happened socially. Although James
could recognize, after the fact, that he'd said or done something
untoward or indecent or downright rude, he never had a lesson learned
from the past to apply to the future. And because he had never learned
to inhibit his impulses, no matter how many promises he made to himself
or to others, he always forgot. A prisoner of impulsivity, he was truly
a prisoner of the present, and a lonely one at that. The number of
acquaintances he had used to be enough, he admitted. The quality of
relationships was finally beginning to matter, and he wanted to acquire
a few strong ones. Intuition

Not too long ago, watching a family taking pictures with a throw-away
camera at an important event, I volunteered to take a few with my own
camera and send them a disk later. I don't know what moved me to step in
that way, because I didn't stop to think about it first, wondering what
they might say or do. I simply reacted to what I saw in the moment, a
family obviously proud of the young man being honored. Perhaps the woman
who accepted my offer was as impulsive as I, but that chance meeting has
developed into a friendship I have no reason to think won't last. One of
the paradoxes of impulsivity is that, finely tuned, it can work to your
advantage. You can read people and situations quickly and see things
instantly that other people might completely overlook. With its
intrinsic pressure and intensity, trading was definitely the right line
of work for James, no matter that he'd been fired twice already. His
problem had nothing to do with his inability to handle the exhausting
pace or make snap decisions. The difficult challenge for James was
nurturing the creative and beneficial aspects of his ADHD while
compensating for its negative aspects ---in other words, holding on to
his strengths, even as he worked to rid himself of what led him into
trouble. If he could remain outgoing rather

than rude, and energetic rather than overbearing, then he'd be on the
way to creating a fulfilling life. If, on the other hand, his intuition
remained "untuned"---if it caused only more of the adverse behavior that
resulted in losing both his job and his friends---then James would
continue down a self-destructive path. N. NARROWING THE FOCUS

Because he perpetually got himself into trouble by not remembering the
consequences of past behaviors, James needed to identify a few things
that happened repeatedly. He always chose instant gratification because
he lost sight of the bigger picture. He was easily and frequently bored,
so he created high-intensity moments, like gambling and clubbing.
Friendships were important to him, but his desire to be liked led him
into superficial relationships, where he had many new acquaintances but
no true friends. People tired of him quickly, and they left rather than
help him change or become accountable. He simply wasn't worth their time
or emotional investment. After listing those problems in his coaching
notebook, James also listed long-term goals related to controlling his
finances and impulse spending, as well as keeping his temper and
language in check. He decided to begin by narrowing his focus to social
skills in order to make and keep new friends. If he could manage not to
drive people away, he could eventually concentrate on finding a true
soul mate, someone with whom he could develop an intimate, lasting
relationship---someone with whom he could build a life. "If I can learn
to keep my big mouth shut," he said again, "maybe people will see I'm
not really such a bad guy." Adhering to Social Rules

Many people consider etiquette a quaint art of the past, but while no
one can dispute that we seem to be living in an "anything goes" society,
there is a breaking point. "Enough!" we eventually hear when someone has
brazenly, or even inadvertently, crossed a certain line. "I don't have
to listen to this, I don't have to accept this anymore." Constructing a
healthy social life would require James to adhere to social rules and to
maintain personal boundaries---skills with which he, and most people
with ADHD, generally struggle. Talking too much and interrupting others,
for example, or being too "honest," without regard to

anyone's feelings, is not acceptable. James would have to face the fact
that even if talk show hosts and television personalities shout each
other down with barbed insults and coarse language, ordinary people have
a limited threshold for absorbing such insults on a personal level. Most
won't abide unreliability for too long, either. Repeatedly canceling
appointments, showing up late, and forgetting important dates like
anniversaries or birthdays test even a parent's infinite patience, and
it's a rare individual---hardly a superficial acquaintance---who will
put up with a pattern of it. True, James did not easily abide fools,
but, just as true, most people do not abide constant rudeness. He needed
to learn that behavior and respect cut both ways. S. STRATEGIZING

To practice self-control over his impulsive behavior, James first needed
to increase his self-awareness. Because he was usually unaware of his
impulsive responses until it was too late, I asked him to try to isolate
repeated patterns so that he could replace them with more appropriate
actions. This would require planned, deliberate behavior, however, which
was alien to his natural impulsivity, so I knew we'd have to proceed in
baby steps to ward off his frustration. The first step would be to keep
a log. Creating Reliability with Himself

It was important for James to establish a sense of reliability with
himself so that he could eventually become reliable in his work and
social relationships with others. Many of my clients have found useful a
motto I've posted in my office: "I say what I will do and I will do what
I say." Once James agreed to try implementing this philosophy into his
own life, I asked him to identify and commit to one or two specific
activities for each day, writing down only those things that must get
done, as simple as locking the doors at night, for instance, or as
necessary as mailing a birthday card to his mother. Once he was
consistently accomplishing the items on the list, he could go on to
phase two, monitoring his schedule. Schedule Monitoring

I asked James to monitor himself every half hour over the upcoming
weekend, a commitment that required vigilance and attention, neither of
which came easily to his ADHD mind. Because he couldn't promise to keep

his regular coaching notebook with him, he agreed to carry a small, less
obvious pad, in which he had marked out his plan for each of the two
days, everything he wanted or needed to do. Next to each, I asked him to
write notations every half hour about where he was and what he was
actually doing in relation to his plan. What an eye-opener that exercise
turned out to be for James! It didn't matter that a third cup of coffee
hadn't been on his list, but a few other things were noteworthy, like
the new ski boots he'd bought. The cost was not the issue, but the fact
that he had strayed from his Saturday plan was. So were the missed phone
call to his sister and the bills he hadn't mailed on Sunday afternoon.
Both represented failure to follow through. "I say what I will do," he
had promised. "I will do what I say." But it hadn't happened. Over the
course of our work together, James began to make small changes to
address the impulsive behavior that he saw in his logs. He removed his
credit cards from his wallet before he went out, for example, and
carried just enough cash to cover necessities like lunch or dinner and
emergencies like a flat tire or low gas tank. He deliberately stopped
going to certain movie theaters to avoid the clubs he'd pass on the way.
Consequences

More important, he began to add to his logs the repercussions of his
impulsive behavior so he could learn to evaluate the consequences of
certain actions. Maybe he could excuse away an unreturned phone call to
his sister, but he saw that it was a lot more difficult to dismiss his
nephew's disappointment in its aftermath. Uncle James hadn't been there
to see eightyear-old Jamie collect the soccer star award, not because he
hadn't wanted to go, but because he hadn't returned the phone call to
learn it was going to happen. Fed up by her brother's history of not
responding to messages she'd left on his machine, his sister had refused
to leave yet another reminder about the upcoming ceremony. "You're
mean," Jamie had cried to James later. "Why did Mommy name me after
you?" Actions had consequences, James saw, and he admitted something for
the first time. "Maybe Beth was right," he said. "It wasn't little Jamie
who was being the jerk." Asking For and Accepting Feedback

Working with me meant that James was accountable to me to follow up on
strategies we designed for him, but he also needed to enlist the help of
others when he was in the moment of impulsive behavior. If he could be
aware as it was happening that he was interrupting, for example, rather
than realizing it after the fact, he could begin to understand what he
might do differently. The best choice of an accountability partner, of
course, was someone he trusted and admired, someone with whom he felt
motivated to change. It's one thing to ask for help. It's quite another
to be open to honest feedback, a second reason the choice of
accountability partner was crucial. James had to keep in mind that he
was hypersensitive to negative feedback, which he tended to regard as
character assassination rather than constructive commentary. It was
important that the person be able to use neutral, objective language
("When I was trying to answer your question, you cut me off before I had
finished," for instance) and not sarcasm or criticism or judgment
("What's the matter with you? You're always cutting me off. You're so
rude"). But it was just as important that James listen actively and
openly to what was being said. Learning to ask for corrections is
difficult, especially for high-flying performers used to orchestrating
the moves, so none of what lay ahead was going to be easy. Giving Others
Permission

I know from experience that impulsivity sometimes makes me blurt out
things that I don't mean to say, but even more, it makes it difficult
for me to get to the point. I always do eventually, but in the meantime,
I know people can get restless waiting to hear what I'm trying to say.
Instead of taking the chance of losing them, I've learned to give them
permission in advance to interrupt me with a leading question. "What
point are you trying to make here?" they might ask, which immediately
brings me back into focus. And it works as well for my listeners as it
does for me. Instead of growing impatient as I talk and talk, they can
comfortably and politely rein me in. I suggested this strategy to James,
as well as one that has worked for other impulsive clients---rehearsing.
Planning Ahead

Rehearsing is a way of planning possible details for an upcoming
conversation so you can collect your thoughts ahead of time. It also
helps you avoid emotionally charged, counterproductive responses to
others, exactly the kind of behavior you're trying to eliminate. Keeping
in mind the advice to try to talk about what interests the other person,
James wrote several ideas in his notebook that he could use to rehearse
for an upcoming date: • What special interests does the person have? •
What things does the person enjoy doing on weekends or vacations? •
Where has the person traveled or lived? • Does the person admire or look
up to any particular individuals?

The idea was to practice focusing on the person he would be with,
especially on keeping the conversation on the "higher ground"---nothing
that should cause discomfort, but nothing blatantly superficial, either.
Once he had decided on possible topics, he could then practice phrasing
the questions the way he hoped to ask them, which would make them easier
to remember: • What do you like to do after work? What do you really
enjoy just for yourself? • What do you like doing on weekends? • Where
do you go on vacations? • What kind of music do you relax to? • Have you
seen any good movies lately?

Rehearsing also meant considering topics involving himself, subjects he
could talk about to uphold his end of the conversation. To help him
clarify what he would say, and to make him comfortable talking about
himself, I suggested to James that he write out answers to questions
such as the following: • What are the key things I want the person to
know about me tonight? • What interests can I talk about? • What can I
say about my job? • What would be appropriate to say about my friends
and family? • What kind of language will be appropriate with a date?

People who are at ease socially might wonder about such deliberate
planning ahead of time, but for James and those like him with ADHD
issues, especially impulsivity, it can mean the difference between
keeping and losing friends. The strategy can work just as well
professionally. Next time James had to meet with his boss, for instance,
he'd be able to ask similar questions beforehand: • What's the point of
the meeting? • What do I have to do to prepare myself? • What language
is appropriate for a business meeting, as opposed to a social setting?
Role-Playing

The bottom line for James was to do as much planning as possible to keep
impulsivity at bay. Stressful situations had always triggered
impulsively negative responses in him, so it was important to practice
what he could say as well as what he could not say---and when he should
say nothing at all. Once again, James asked an accountability partner to
help out, this time to engage in role-playing with him. Much to his
surprise, his sister agreed to take the part of prospective dates, and
because she knew him so well, she deliberately raised topics that would
ordinarily cause him to erupt. In the beginning, he did erupt---he'd had
a lifetime of practice, after all---but they kept rehearsing alternate
responses until James learned to exert some selfcontrol, at least enough
to make another date possible. Two of his fraternity brothers assumed
the role of either coworker or boss, and they and James rehearsed
appropriate professional language and behavior, all the while testing
each other's patience. "I get so frustrated," James admitted as he
recounted the early roleplaying process. "I'm surprised they stick with
me. Sometimes I say pretty awful stuff. I couldn't take it if it was me
who had to put up with them." W. WORKING THE PLAN

James's frustration was exactly why working the plan was so difficult,
but it was also why it remained so critical. Strategizing and setting up
structures hadn't been much of a challenge. He had enjoyed it, in fact,
because he was by nature creative and imaginative, and he was always
open to trying something new. But he was also easily bored, and sticking
with an action,

especially one that required slow, deliberate repetition, was
uncomfortable and disconcerting. James thrived on speed and intensity
and high stakes. Recording what he was doing each half hour or thinking
before speaking in his role-playing exercises was enough to make him run
away from accountability. "I can't take this," he said too many times to
count. Creating a History

James had to create a method for keeping his future goals in mind. I
suggested that he add to his logs a list of accomplishments and goals
that he could review frequently, an especially important activity for
someone who lives perpetually in the present. By studying his entries,
James could begin to see the relationship between actions and
results---causes and effects--- and give himself something to draw on in
future situations. He could also see the impact of current choices on
future goals, something he had traditionally been unable to do.
Naturally, there were countless times when he became frustrated and
impatient with the drudgery, as he called it, and with spending time on
all that reviewing and figuring out and thinking about---all that
conscious thought rather than the intuition and impulse on which he had
long relied. As his coach, I cheered him on when he balked and stopped,
and when he wasn't checking in with me, he turned to his trusted
advisers and accountability partners. E. EVALUATING

James wasn't kidding when he wondered how his sister and friends had
maintained the patience and fortitude to stick with him. "I don't like
being told what to do," he admitted, "and I don't want to hear what I'm
doing wrong. If they start doing that, I wind up swearing at them or
walking out of the room, and then we have to start all over. Who needs
this?" Many times he was ready to abandon the role-playing, abandon the
accountability partners, abandon everything. And while it was obvious
that he had to continue to create new strategies to keep from getting
bored, he also had to know the difference between ones that worked and
ones that didn't and never would. Role-playing was definitely working,
bruised feelings and an occasional crushed ego notwithstanding.

Sign posting, on the other hand, didn't work. James had looked at the
sign in my office---the one about doing what I say and saying what I
will do ---because I drew his attention to it and talked about it. And
even though many of my clients use posters and Post-it notes to stay on
track, that strategy just wasn't right for James. "I don't really like
to read," he said. "It's enough to be keeping those logs. I don't want
to have to read anything else, thanks. I don't care if it's only a
couple of sentences." It's natural and inevitable that clients discover
their own strategies. Some will work, but others won't, and they'll know
only by evaluating what they're doing. For clients like James, whose
main issues are about impulsivity, evaluating anything is
counterintuitive. This part of the A-N-S-W-E-R process required more
effort than James had imagined. It took a while, but he did come to
realize that rehearsing and role-playing were worth the frustration they
often caused when he had to repeat the procedures after acting or
speaking inappropriately. He learned over time that he could control his
outbursts if he prepared for upcoming activities in advance. R.
REPEATING THE PROCESS

For James, easily bored and always searching for the next, more intense
high, the A-N-S-W-E-R process had to become a lifelong reality check,
the framework on which he would build the rest of his life. Whatever
phase of life he was in, he could rely on the process for structure,
which would be the antidote to impulsivity. James had to incorporate the
A-N-S-W-E-R process into his entire life, repeating it over and over
again. By permanently keeping a problemsolving log, he could learn to
defuse emotions by distinguishing between the emotions themselves and
the things that triggered them. To prevent potentially volatile
situations from erupting, he could continue to rehearse appropriate
responses beforehand. To clear his head of inevitable toxic thoughts
before meetings or important conversations, he could call a willing
friend and "rant" for a designated five minutes, and then go to the
meeting, calm. James had to remember two things: Self-management is a
necessary life process. To counter impulsivity, so is the A-N-S-W-E-R.

WITHIN THE BRAIN: IMPULSIVITY

by John J. Ratey, M.D. Impulsivity is one of the cardinal symptoms of
ADHD and can lead to selfdestructive behavior. What most people mean by
impulsivity is that the person has to act immediately before thinking
and considering consequences. It is often cited as a characteristic of
immaturity in persons with ADHD and fits with what we know of the
brain's development. Until people are in their early twenties, their
decision making and many of their responses to the world engage mainly
the limbic area---the "emotional brain." We see little inhibition and
little evaluation of consequences, or involvement of the frontal cortex.
As they age, or mature psychologically, they begin to respond with the
frontal cortex, or "rational brain," which helps to keep the emotional
brain in check. However, in individuals with ADHD, the rational brain is
often slower to respond, which results in their having a quicker, more
immediate reaction to the world. The limbic area overrides the
prefrontal cortex, and thus these people fail to "think about" their
response. Instead, they act. Both coaching strategies and medication can
help slow responses and "give a second to stop and think." Individuals
with ADHD can also strengthen nerve pathways by practicing skills and
strategies in delaying gratification and evaluating consequences.

Strategies for Controlling Impulsivity Any of the strategies that worked
for James might work for you, too, especially engaging an accountability
partner with whom to role-play or rehearse before a social or business
event. Since many clients have also found keeping a log and asking for
feedback helpful, try those, too, as long as you're willing to accept
the feedback openly. Or try any of the following, being sure to give
yourself enough time to evaluate how they're working. Change will not
happen overnight, though, so don't give up after one or two attempts.
WRITE OUT YOUR SCHEDULE NIGHTLY

To successfully self-manage, it is imperative that you mark out a to-do
list and a schedule at the end of each day. Waking up without a
designated structure for the day is as good as taking a day off! Look at
the schedule first thing in the morning. Make this a ritual.

CREATE A "HOME" FOR THOUGHTS

If you're someone who often complains that great ideas come to you in
the middle of meetings or when you're concentrating on something else,
you can capture those ideas by giving them a home and writing them down.
Keep track of your ideas in a notebook or computer file so that you can
get to them at a better time. The purpose is to provide "containers" for
thoughts so that you don't impulsively act on them in the moment. THINK
BEFORE JUMPING

Before agreeing to work on yet one more project, join one more board, or
meet someone for lunch, stop and ask yourself, before answering: "Is
this reasonable?" It is okay to say "no." Do not overextend yourself!
Often people say "yes" too quickly without first thinking of the
consequences. Have a dialogue rehearsed in your mind to be ready for
requests on your time. Say, for example, "I need some time to think
about how this will fit it into my schedule. Let me get back to you." If
they demand an immediate answer, simply say no! APPOINT A "WATCHDOG"

Enlist a trusted friend to watch over you and your actions. Give him or
her permission to be very honest and to confront you if you are about to
do something you might regret, like calling an old flame, for example,
or walking off your job or skipping a business meeting. Go over a
pre-agreedupon dialogue for these circumstances---for example, "Jake,
remember you told me to hold you back when you try to do these types of
things because you forget the consequences." For this to work, you must
allow the appointed person to become firm with you if you continue to
try to justify your actions. WHITE HOUSE DAMAGE CONTROL STRATEGY

One of my most impulsive clients surrounds herself with a strong team of
advisers and uses them regularly. She says to build this philosophy into
your life: "Don't make too many moves without consulting at least three
trusted advisers. Choose people whose values are closest to yours and
whose minds are more logical than yours." Using this strategy, you'll
stay more on course by thinking through consequences.

RID YOURSELF OF TOXIC FEELINGS

If you do get sidetracked and consumed by toxic emotions, it's important
to get rid of them before going into a meeting or having an important
conversation. Do what James did. Call a (close) friend and say, "I have
to clear my head, can I just talk at you? After five minutes tell me to
hang up! Okay?" Then let it rip! This helps to clear your head of your
extraneous thoughts and enables you to concentrate more fully on what is
in front of you without the fear of blurting out something that you'll
regret later. LEARN TO SELF-OBSERVE

To help curb acting on impulsive thoughts, learn to "watch" yourself in
action and monitor what you do and don't do. I personally pretend I have
a minicamera attached to a hat I'm wearing. I try to observe myself
through the lens of this camera---my hands, my body---in all actions I
take throughout the day. I continually ask myself, "Am I on task? Off
task? Am I where I am supposed to be? Am I working on priority items?"
This strategy worked so well for me that once I slapped one of my hands
when I noticed it had "wandered off" and was brushing my dog's teeth
instead of remaining at the computer keyboard writing this book, where
it was supposed to be! DO IT ACTIVELY

Allow yourself to use flip charts or to hash things out on pieces of
paper as you talk. Often, standing up or pacing while talking can help
thoughts come together in a more organized manner. BOTTOM-LINE IT

If you're like a lot of people with ADHD, you may have difficulty
getting to the essence of a thought and will engage instead in long,
descriptive stories. If this is you, practice the art of
"bottom-lining," which means getting to the point. Ask yourself, "What
is the key thing I want the other person to understand?" By clarifying
your point this way first, you'll make it more easily when you actually
speak to the other person. Strategies for Developing a Social Life

In order to have a life outside of work, you have to have the ability to
construct a social life. This means making and keeping a variety of
friends, getting along with others in group situations as well as
one-on-one, reading and adhering to social rules, and maintaining
personal boundaries---skills with which people with ADHD generally
struggle. Other issues can include talking too much and interrupting
others, being too "honest," and being repeatedly unreliable with
friends: canceling appointments, showing up late, forgetting important
dates like anniversaries or birthdays. These symptoms often make you
come across as arrogant, selfish, aggressive, or not honoring personal
boundaries. KNOW THE STEPS

The first step in knowing how to make and keep friends is knowing
yourself. What are your interests? What types of things do you like to
do? Once you can identify what your interests are, you can increase the
opportunities of meeting like-minded people. That means locating clubs
or activities that focus on those same interests. Next is carving out
the time to be involved and showing up to meetings and activities so you
can increase your possibilities of meeting people. Last, if you get
nervous in new situations, you must have a dialogue rehearsed to break
the ice and introduce yourself to others. MAKE SOFT COMMITMENTS

Keep friends by keeping open the lines of communication. If you are the
type of person who often backs out of plans because of overcommitments
or gets overwhelmed at the last minute, simply let people know that
you're making a "soft" commitment and not a "hard" one. Tell them, for
example, that you'd like to go to the show and are tentatively saying
yes, but that you might have a conflict and be unable to make it at the
last minute. That way, you will avoid disappointing people if you don't
show up. Do, however, have the courtesy to at least let the person know
you're backing out as much in advance as possible. PLAN! PLAN! PLAN!

If you don't make the time and space for meeting up with friends and
having a social life, it won't happen. Learn to plan to see your friends
and to have fun! Be sure to look at your calendar weekly and actually
block out

social time. Make a commitment and keep to it. Make it a regular and
recurring activity so it becomes a ritual, like a movie on Sunday
evening or a bike ride on Saturday afternoon. KEEP ORGANIZED!

If you don't have or can't find your friends' e-mail addresses or
telephone numbers, how can you keep in touch with them? Create a system
to track these details. Put numbers in your Palm-Pilot or in Outlook, or
type out a list and post it over your phone. Don't fool yourself into
thinking that you'll find that Post-it note when the time comes and you
really need it. Make creating and maintaining an organizational system
for these details a priority! THE SMALL THINGS COUNT

People with ADHD often let small things slide, like remembering a
birthday, returning a call, or responding to e-mail. These small details
can go a long, long way in helping to build relationships. Set
reminders; write birthdays in your calendar or PDA, and make plans
around the special events. If you don't have time to chat on the phone,
at least acknowledge that you received the call and are busy, but don't
just let things hang and expect people to understand. Making and keeping
friends is a two-way street, and communication is a large part of it.
GET FEEDBACK

Some people with ADHD are very adept at social skills, while others are
not. If you have challenges starting small talk or reading nonverbal
social cues, for example, or if you simply want to improve your general
social skills, ask a trusted observer for candid feedback on how you
present yourself. This feedback can be invaluable in helping to know how
you come across. It can help you learn to better self-observe, to
fine-tune things like eye contact and table manners, and to avoid
talking too much or too loudly. DON'T LET YOURSELF GET TRAPPED

If you know you get bored quickly at parties, or get tired and want to
leave but are dependent on others for a ride, plan an escape route.
Drive separately, or take money for a cab. Tell your friends ahead of
time that you

might leave early so they're not surprised. Don't allow yourself to be
in any open-ended situations if they cause you problems. It is essential
that everything be as planned and structured as possible.

If you're trying to control your impulsivity, the key to success is to
select a strategy, work through it, and judge its effectiveness. If
you've given a strategy sufficient time and it's really not working, try
something else. Remember, impulsive people are usually creative people,
so use that creativity to design strategies of your own. OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 8

Distractibility

"I pulled a Lucy again," my friend Cathy joked the other day, a
reference to the TV character of old whose antics constantly confounded
her husband, Ricky, and who occasionally reminds us of ourselves. "I had
another ADHD moment! I went to go out and I got in the car, I started
it, forgot my list inside, and went back to the house to get it, the
phone rang, I answered, and . . . well, you know the rest. An hour and a
half later, I was looking for my purse and remembered it was in the car,
and I went out and found the car still running in the driveway!" And so
it sometimes goes for those of us with ADHD, who find ourselves suddenly
distracted from the task at hand and winding our way from one activity
or idea to the next, "like somebody is clicking a remote control and
switching the thought process in your mind," as one of my clients put
it. Cathy and I are lucky, though. We joke about what we sometimes do
because we can joke. When we give in to distractions, we know how to
pull ourselves back. We acknowledge our ADHD tendencies, and we're able
to recognize when we wander off course. We're beyond the dysfunction
that led to our respective diagnoses long ago, and we accept moments
like Cathy's latest "adventure" as part of what living with ADHD means.
We can laugh about things we do because (1) we already know we are not
our ADHD---we've separated ourselves from this sporadic behavior; and
(2) we have strategies and structures in place to keep us on track. Our
occasional wanderings don't define us in our own or in other people's
minds.

Distractibility When they say they're distracted, most people mean that
they're temporarily unable to focus or concentrate, a situational
condition that will pass when the factors underlying it change. When
individuals with ADHD are distracted, however, their condition is
ongoing, a brain anomaly that leaves them unable to screen out competing
stimuli or hold their focus on something long enough to do anything with
it. Distractibility is a condition with which they live, a particularly
troublesome one given a culture that appears bent on aggravating it.
Sometimes it seems that one would have to live out a vow of silence in a
monastic cell somewhere not to be on sensory overload, scattered and
frenzied and off in a million directions. As a people, we're wired and
connected, clicking our way through the days, and for all the ways in
which technology serves us, it also manages to keep us at its mercy.
There's a constant demand from this technology-driven environment to
shift attention quickly and often, to shift and shift again, so we have
little time or impetus to think, let alone think deeply, about anything.
The minute we try to focus on one thing, a light flashes or a ring tone
sounds or a buzzer vibrates, and off we go to answer the call of what's
next. How to keep up? we wonder. How to be everywhere yet feel nowhere?
So many devices, so little eye contact; so many rushed e-mails and voice
mails, so little thought-provoking dialogue; so much noise, so little
meditative silence. Who even knows what to do with quiet these days,
except turn up the volume to drown out the discomfort of a solitary
thought: "What am I missing?" Most of us are stretched to the breaking
point, with so many demands on our time and so many people wanting so
many things from us that without the wires of interconnectedness, we
fear we'll fall behind. And where will we be then? we wonder. Who'll get
the edge if we turn down the volume and disconnect? To one degree or
another, everybody is rushed, everybody is scattered, everybody has
those miles to go before sitting back and taking stock. The wonder is
that somehow, despite their hectic and crazy lifestyles, most people
manage to get on with the business of doing what they have to do and
still remain in control of their lives. Then again, most people aren't
living with ADHD.

There's a difference in the degree and the frequency to which ADHD
individuals are susceptible to all the distractions out there, and
there's a major difference in the consequences of their behavior. They
start off with a compromised ability to stay on task, and the demands of
the click-click, push-button world make everything worse. "Oh, well,
everybody feels this way" doesn't apply to them. Individuals with ADHD
know full well that everybody does not feel out of control the way they
do. What they don't know is what to do about it. A Different
Manifestation While many clients jump from one activity to the next as a
result of the distractions, others report an internal equivalent of all
that physical movement, a hyperactivity of the brain. It's their minds
that race, and they jump from thought to thought, from idea to idea.
Paradoxically, they can appear "spaced out" when it happens, so they
might be perceived as dullwitted rather than the whirlwinds of idea and
imagination they really are. It's especially disconcerting when their
minds race during business meetings or while talking to others. Their
attention wanders from what's being discussed to what's popping up in
their own heads, so they don't listen actively to what other people are
saying. Then, when they focus back in on the conversation or subject of
the meeting, they're lost, which causes them great embarrassment. "When
I'm in a conversation with my boss or someone I want to impress," one
client told me, "to make sure that I don't go off track every time a
word triggers a new thought process, I have to tell myself over and over
again to shut up and listen. It's like telling yourself to inhale and
exhale. Usually after these conversations are finished, I have no idea
what was said. I have an anxiety attack. I'm embarrassed and ashamed of
myself because I have to end up calling the person and asking questions.
Then the person is shocked that I was standing there and didn't listen.
They end up thinking I'm stupid or dense." It's difficult to explain to
colleagues or friends that you zoned out for a while and have no idea
what's just been said. It shakes their confidence in your intelligence,
and they often suspect a lack of interest on your part when you can't
concentrate enough to hear them. It's a lose-lose situation

for both of you. The speaker feels devalued as a person by someone who
they think won't pay attention and then becomes distant or even
resentful in response to what he perceives as your lack of concern. Then
you become defensive or withdrawn in response to that judgment, leaving
both of you angry and upset. "I wish I could explain how awful this is,"
that client went on. "I always feel so guilty when I've missed what my
boss has said, as if I tried not to pay attention, like I did it
deliberately. And then I get mad that I feel that way and mad at my boss
for making me feel that way, even though I know he thinks he's the one
who should be upset. Believe me, the whole thing stinks!"
Barbara---Dealing with Distraction Barbara was a client dealing with
distractibility. While preparing for a particularly important meeting
one day, she found herself searching through piles of papers on her
desk. As she was moving files around, she ran across parts of other
projects that she'd been searching for earlier in the week, papers she
thought she had lost, so she started working on those projects. "It was
stupid," she said. "I had to meet a client at four that afternoon, and I
should've been finishing the report for him." It got worse, she said. "I
don't know where the day went, but I went on the Internet to check
something out for one of the projects and ended up spending the rest of
the afternoon researching vacations. Before I knew it, it was three and
I still had so much to do on the report. I barely made it to the
client's office on time. I don't know how I got through the presentation
at all. The thing is, it was good," she said, "but I'm sick of living
like this." That type of behavior was nothing new for her, after all.
Like most of my distractible clients, she had a whole repertoire of
stories like it. Not that long ago, she had missed a business meeting
entirely, not because she'd planned to, but because she was following
her unscripted thoughts. "I never mean to get sidetracked," she said by
way of explanation. "All of a sudden I'm just caught up in something I
never saw coming, and bam! Like that meeting---it's not like I was
trying not to go." But like so many other times, as Barbara was
outlining the meeting in her head, something else had caught her eye. "I
saw myself in the rearview

mirror while I was driving over to the building," she said, "and I
looked a mess, and I decided to make a quick stop at the hairdresser
first, but then when I was having my hair blown out, I saw that my shirt
looked all wrinkled, and when I went to get back in my car, I noticed a
boutique somebody had told me about, so I decided to take a quick look
for something else I could wear, and before I knew it I was buying a
great new suit, and by the time I got to the meeting, nobody was there.
They'd all gone already. I missed the whole thing." A PATTERN AT WORK

Despite her erratic behavior, Barbara had moved up the ladder quickly at
a major public relations firm, recently landing the title of executive
vice president. Her innovative ideas had won over many clients and
brought them wide visibility in some of the nation's most significant
media markets, but although she was highly valued for her creative
thinking, she was constantly struggling to complete projects and PR
campaigns on time. Like other executives I've coached, she usually
started out strong with the media campaigns she initiated, but once the
initial excitement of creating something new wore off, she lost interest
and lacked follow-through. Too often, the goal of completing a long-term
project was too far off in the distance, and she failed to make the
appropriate plans to reach it. Working with her couldn't have been easy,
either, Barbara conceded. She rarely returned phone calls promptly or
sent e-mails when she was supposed to, and she frequently scheduled
appointments that she ended up either breaking because she was
unprepared or forgetting about entirely. "I know they think I'm
undependable, I've heard them say that," she told me, "but they're
wrong. Of course I get frustrated, I know I do, and I know I lose my
temper," she added. "I know the assistants all want to be transferred,
because they say I blame them for not doing things I never even asked
them to do in the first place," she also said. "But I really don't see
that. They say I'm arrogant. I don't believe I'm the way they say. I'm
not mean." Because she often thought she'd told others what she wanted
them to do, when in reality she never had, coworkers, and particularly
her subordinates, could never understand what she expected of them. She
was constantly changing plans midstream and coming up with new ideas.

Details were frustrating for her to set out for others. They were in her
head, which was enough for her. She couldn't understand why nobody else
saw them the way she did. Barbara wondered why so much was happening to
her at this stage of her career. "I'm sinking," she said. "I'm losing my
edge." A PATTERN AT HOME

Because she had found it necessary to stay long hours after work to
catch up on detailed paperwork and projects that had fallen through the
cracks, her lack of organizational skills had also taken a toll on her
personal life, almost driving her husband, Ed, out the door. "He said
he's tired of seeing half-finished projects around the house, and he's
fed up that I'm always staying late at the office," Barbara said. "But
what does he want? We have a live-in, so it's not as if nobody's there
for the kids. I try to do the shopping on the weekend, but he complains
I end up buying a lot of junk food or whatever because I lose the list
or forget to bring it with me. I just never get it right, he says."
Barbara complained that Ed treated her like a child. He was always
calling her during the day to remind her of various things for home, or
he would call if she had remembered to take her cell phone with her in
the first place and then turned it on. He had also started doing the
things he wished she would do for herself, like putting notes by the
door or on the seat of her car or even stuck directly to the dashboard.
He had taken to commenting about the notes, too, she said, and
commenting about how disappointed in her he had become, but despite his
reminders and remarks, Barbara said she often forgot things anyway. "The
nagging doesn't help," she said. "The truth is, it just gets me really
annoyed when he thinks he's always right about everything, and then we
wind up fighting." What had happened to Barbara was exactly what I've
seen happen with many of my clients. As her professional
responsibilities increased, the challenges she faced were affecting her
spouse and children, and the strengths she had used in the past were no
longer sufficient to help her. When they were dating, and first married,
Ed had seen Barbara's behavior as creative and spontaneous, and he had
often remarked on her ability to think quickly and to breathe energy
into even the dullest occasions. Now he

viewed that same behavior as irresponsible and thoughtless, a source of
constant strife, as he accused her of "not even caring" about him or
their kids. "We obviously don't count that much or you'd do what you
say," he sometimes told her. "We don't mean anything to you anymore." Ed
felt devalued, Barbara felt guilty and under attack, and both felt
resentful, which are not uncommon reactions when one of the spouses has
ADHD. The A-N-S-W-E-R for Barbara

Like other executives with ADHD, Barbara had benefited from an ability
to take risks, draw unique connections that others might have missed,
and react quickly and effectively under high pressure. Her bright ideas
and outof-the-box thinking were rewarded in the corporate world, so her
highranking executive status and the kudos she received in the field of
public relations begged two questions: How could someone as successful
as Barbara be seen as enthusiastic and committed on the one hand and
arrogant and disappointing on the other? More important, what could she
do to regain control of her life so she'd no longer believe she was
sinking? A. ACKNOWLEDGING THE ADHD

Barbara's first challenge was to acknowledge that she had ADHD. Only by
understanding the neurobiology at the root of her behavior could she
stop the self-blame, feel more in control, and create a plan of action.
"I've been so depressed since I knew I had ADHD," she told me about her
recent diagnosis, admitting that she'd done little to learn what she
could do to compensate for her symptoms. She had merely felt sorry for
herself, resigned to a fate she didn't think she deserved. "To me it
sounds like constant disorganization and forgetfulness," she said. "I
didn't bargain for this, especially after I got the promotion. I thought
everything would be great. Now that I know I have ADHD, I feel like I'll
be a mess forever." Distractibility as an Advantage

Interestingly, there can be advantages to the kind of diffused attention
Barbara manifested. She was capable of seeing not only many facets to
one problem, but myriad solutions as well. She could also see and pay
attention to many things at once, while other people generally screened
out

competing stimuli and focused on primarily one thing at a time, shifting
focus only as needed. In her previous position as an account
representative, Barbara had been responsible to clients for specific
duties. When they needed to respond quickly to negative publicity or get
the word out promptly about a new service or product, she was able to
react immediately by hyperfocusing on the challenge at hand. In a
moment's notice, her out-of-the-box thinking could turn negative
publicity into positive action, and she could come up with original ways
to present a client's activities to the public. By responding so well in
those high-pressure situations, she had established herself as a jewel
in the public relations field and was soon promoted to her current
position. Ironically, the same abilities that got her promoted were the
ones that caused her trouble when her environment, and the demands it
made on her, changed. In lower and midlevel positions, there is
typically an established sense of structure over which an individual
employee has little control. The inherent accountability and defined
deadlines of such structure work well for many individuals with ADHD, so
in her earlier, postcollege position at a smaller firm, as well as in
her former position at the current firm, Barbara was in a perfect
environment for someone with her skills and deficits. For one thing, she
worked closely with colleagues, who functioned together as a team,
discussing projects out loud and interacting continually with one
another. She worked closely with clients, too, where tasks were hands-on
and the one-to-one interaction was stimulating. She always knew exactly
to whom she was accountable for a project, and she was able to work with
a passion and commitment noted not only by her superiors, but by
competing firms as well. It was this energy, in fact, that had compelled
her current firm to recruit her. Distractibility as a Disadvantage

Being promoted had made life much more challenging for Barbara, as she
faced the negative consequences of distractibility. She had been
rewarded for success in the structured environment from which she had
come, but she was now, paradoxically, held hostage to a lack of
structure with increasing autonomy and flexibility, a potentially
disastrous situation for someone with ADHD.

In this higher-level executive position, the onus had suddenly shifted
from responsibility and accountability to others, to responsibility and
accountability for others. She was expected to manage people, delegate
responsibilities, write evaluations, keep detailed records, and hand in
expense reports, all of which had to be self-initiated and none of which
matched her strengths. She missed the order provided by her former
superiors, an environment she was finding impossible to re-create for
herself and those under her. Her department regularly appeared chaotic,
with no one in charge of increasingly disgruntled workers. Barbara
simply did not know what was needed, and because she was in charge,
nobody else felt free to tell her. Without the structure in which she
had previously excelled, Barbara had no way to keep distractions at bay
and fulfill the demands of her new position. The inability to rein in
her attention meant that she often hyperfocused on one task to the
exclusion of others in which she should have been engaged. When the
stakes were high, that ability was advantageous, but since someone with
a variable attention system cannot control it very well, especially if
she's unaware that it even exists, she was often caught up in what
struck her fancy at a given moment, something stimulating, perhaps, but
simultaneously unnecessary, such as searching the Internet for possible
vacation spots. Basically, she had no sense of priorities, and one
activity was equally as consuming as the next. Barbara's ADHD problems
had always existed, but they became exacerbated by changes in her work
status. Once she understood her ADHD, she could take responsibility for
the symptoms that her new work environment had brought to light. N.
NARROWING THE FOCUS

Barbara needed a way to prioritize, and she needed a way to keep
long-term goals in view. If she couldn't make the necessary changes in
her department and in the way she conducted herself, she knew she
couldn't last in her current position. But because she didn't possess an
innate ability to do either, it was going to take concerted effort to
set up systems and structures to address those challenges and to
remember the need for constant vigilance.

In a way, the nature of her ADHD was the very impetus she needed to
begin the journey ahead of her. By her own admission, she was out of
time and out of choices. The stakes were high, so conditions were right
for digging in and making necessary changes. Lack of Planning and
Prioritizing

What appears on the surface to be distraction for individuals with ADHD
is often a lack of planning and prioritizing skills. When it comes to
determining the level of importance of one task or activity over
another, either they can't distinguish between them or they make the
wrong choice. It's not uncommon for people like Barbara to look at the
piles of paper and folders in front of them and not know which one to
attack first, not because they're trying to avoid the tasks, but because
no one thing appears more or less important than the other. Barbara's
need to look through old files, for example, seemed just as critical to
her as her need to prepare the report for the client meeting later that
afternoon. It wasn't that she was purposely putting off the report or
that she dreaded doing it. She lacked the ability to judge the
difference in importance in that moment. On the other hand, when the
choices are limited by a lack of time or when the stakes are high and
immediate, people with ADHD have an uncanny ability to hyperfocus and
choose correctly. They appear to be in complete control. Not only do
they react well in the instant, they also prioritize the steps necessary
to complete the task at hand, the very abilities that often elude them
during less charged or calmer times. Once she realized that she had
little time left to do the report, for example, Barbara immediately
assessed the situation as Do the report or risk losing the client,
exactly the high-stakes, high-pressure moment in which she could excel.
But it wasn't until she was under that extreme pressure that she knew
she had to react. Her brain shifted into high gear, and the ideas
flowed. Without that pressure, she'd been unable to make a choice of one
project over another. Inability to Focus on a Long-Term Goal

For adults with ADHD, a long-term goal is almost impossible to see in
clear perspective. It seems too far off in the distance, like a mirage
that comes and goes, so they shift their focus to something immediately
in front of them with a more stimulating payoff in plain sight.

In her previous job, working directly with clients and having ongoing
interactions with her team, Barbara was accountable for each of the many
smaller tasks it took to complete any long-term project. Timelines were
discussed and set up with the clients, and short-term deadlines had to
be met on the way to completing the final projects. On her own, however,
she had no idea how to proceed, so the long-term goal was never in
focus. It had been difficult for Barbara to admit at first, but by
thinking about the specific effects of ADHD that she was trying to
eliminate, she also saw that responsibility for compensating for her
deficiencies was hers. S. STRATEGIZING

So many of my clients have been derailed by distraction that I thought
Barbara could benefit from strategies most of them had employed. Because
one of her coaching goals was to develop planning and prioritizing
skills, her strategies had to center on a sense of structure, the kind
inherent in her earlier positions but missing in her executive status.
She needed a new pattern that would help her become accountable to
herself now that she no longer needed to report to managers on a regular
basis. A Master To-Do List and a To-Do List

I often recommend to clients like Barbara that they keep two to-do
lists, one for the long term and one for the day. The long-term master
list, which is especially helpful for planning long-term projects,
includes everything you want to do over an extended period of time and
is ongoing. It serves as a kind of long-term memory, allowing you to
chart and accomplish short-term goals and eliminating worry about what
you might forget over time. The second list is for only those things to
be done on a particular day. One possibility is to keep the daily list
on a calendar, designed to let you see your goals as you're trying to
meet them. Another option is to use a notepad with a fresh page for each
day of the week. Barbara had to commit to making her daily lists each
day and every day. Not only would they remind her of what she planned to
accomplish, they would also help her ward off distractions. The point of
making the lists was to use them as a guide for her daily activities,
and with a concrete reminder of what was important in front of her, she
would be more likely to stay focused on her plan.

The daily lists had another function as well. By following them
faithfully and crossing off each task as she completed it, she could
develop a growing sense of what was important relative to what she
wanted to accomplish. Had she looked at such a list the day she was
trying to complete a report for her client, for example, it's fair to
say that she'd have saved research about vacations for another time.
Considering Consequences

The critical step in learning about prioritizing came when Barbara added
to her lists the consequence for failing to complete specific daily
goals. It didn't matter so much if she forgot to pick up her jacket or
skirt from the dry cleaner's, for example, because she had other clothes
she could wear. It mattered significantly that she arrived at her
daughter's spring concert during the last song, however, not only
because while she was at her office answering e-mail, she had missed her
daughter's solo, but also because she had forgotten the flowers the
chorus would present to the director, disappointing everyone and
embarrassing her child. As Barbara realized at the concert, some
actions, or lack of actions, carry deeper consequences than others. For
individuals like her, who forget the importance of the long-term goal,
ideas and tasks appear on a horizontal line of equal importance, not a
vertical ladder of ascending importance. It was critical, therefore,
that she find a way to establish the difference so that she could
separate important concepts and projects from more trivial ones. Keeping
a log of actions and consequences helped her measure the relative
importance of items on her to-do list. Visualize It!

To make your to-do list or calendar more real in your mind, sit down
with it for fifteen minutes each morning and review what you've planned
for the day. Study the list. Study the order in which you'll be doing
things, and visualize yourself performing each item on the list in
detail. Finally, do a "dry run" in your head. It might go something like
this: Get in the car, drive to work, park the car, go to the office,
place the to-do list on my desk, do not check e-mail, make two important
phone calls . . . and so on. If you're a runner or if you go to the gym
each morning before work, rehearse your day during one of those
activities if that strategy suits your style. As long as the

visualization becomes part of your early morning routine, it doesn't
matter where you rehearse. What matters is that you do it. End the
Workday by Setting Up for the Next Workday

Because knowing where you're headed makes it easier to get there, and
because it also provides a road map for where you are going---the
structure you need if you have ADHD---I told Barbara not to leave the
office without preparing for the next workday. At the end of each
workday, for example, give yourself up to thirty minutes to review your
to-do list, seeing how many targets you actually hit that day. Make any
necessary notations, look at your calendar to see what's scheduled for
the next day, write your to-do list for that day, and then clear your
desk as if you're finished working. But don't leave! Stand up, stretch,
then sit back down and pretend that you've just arrived at work the next
morning. Look at your list and identify the project you're dreading
most. Take out the necessary files or other items that you'll need to
start that project and lay them on your desk as if you were going to
begin working on them. Now you can go because your desk is set up to
take on the project and you won't have to make a choice about what to do
first the next day. You've already made it! By setting up for each day
in advance, Barbara would have an easier time initiating action, a skill
she needed in her executive position. It would also improve her
relationship with her subordinates. Being clear in her own mind what she
needed done, she'd be more clear with them about her expectations.
Strategies for Focusing on a Long-Term Goal You don't have to have ADHD
to have a hard time focusing on a long-term goal. The end of a project
can seem far off and the process of getting there insurmountable. It was
easier for Barbara to lose focus and be distracted by ---or actually
attracted to---the quicker payoffs of completing projects on her daily
to-do list. Shorter-term goals were easier to reach, and they didn't
require the sustained attention that was so difficult for her. Their
rewards were instant, exactly what her ADHD brain craved. CHUNKING

Like many people with ADHD, Barbara was unable to break down large,
long-term tasks into smaller, more easily achieved pieces, so she often
avoided the big picture completely. By learning to divide a large
project into chunks, however, she could move the focus away from the
overall daunting task and direct it instead to discrete portions of the
project, essentially treating each as its own task, with each carrying
its own reward for completion. She had difficulty initiating and
returning phone calls to clients, for example. "I see a list of calls
I'm supposed to make," she said, "and I freeze. I don't pick up the
phone." One solution was to divide the phone call list into segments and
decide when they needed to be completed. She could use categories that
made sense to her and that did not require prioritizing by importance,
since she had yet to master that skill. If you have thirty calls to
make, for example, you could start with those to your newest clients or
to those first alphabetically, whatever basis you choose. You're
dividing the task into smaller, more manageable pieces, so you can also
do as one of my former clients did and mark them off, or literally cut
the paper on which the list is written into one section at a time, until
you've made all the calls. That way, as the paper size shrinks in front
of your eyes, you have a visual reminder of getting closer and closer to
fulfilling the goal. Just remember that the focus should be on
completing the project---in this case thirty phone calls---by a certain
time. BABY STEPS

Chunking is similar in concept to baby steps. Baby steps will help you
avoid the feeling of shame that comes from not achieving a task that you
were supposed to complete. They help you divide a long-term project into
tiny segments spread out over a long period. If the task is writing a
report for an important client, for example, step number one could be
allotting ten minutes to list the table of contents, followed by ten
minutes to list the subjects that will go into the report. If you want
to continue at that point, do so. If not, continue at another designated
time. The key to success with these interim baby steps is having a
specific goal and a specific deadline. The important thing is holding up
your

commitment to each step along the way and accomplishing what you've
committed to. START AND STOP TIMES

Barbara said that she felt behind schedule much of the time and that
many of the demands of her executive position left her feeling frazzled.
"All these evaluations and records and expense reports---I can never get
them done when I'm supposed to," she said. "Before I know it, I'm out of
time, and whatever I was doing, well, that's it. I don't get to the next
thing on the list, and then everything falls apart." Most people with
ADHD also report feeling behind schedule. They focus on one task to the
exclusion of others, unaware that time is passing until there's no time
left for the rest of the items that need their attention. To make sure
that she covered everything on her agenda, Barbara had to designate
specific start and stop times for each item. If she were working on
client files, for example, she could designate a ninety-minute period,
stopping at the scheduled time to begin the next item, employee
evaluations, perhaps. It was the sense of being overwhelmed that had
kept her from accomplishing even single tasks within her job
description. Knowing that she would begin and end each at a certain time
offered her a measure of control, not only over her day, but also over
aspects of her job that typically overwhelmed her. W. WORKING THE PLAN

Most of my clients are willing to try almost any strategy I suggest. The
difficult part comes later, when they have to invest in the plan over
the long haul, adjusting according to their unique strengths as they go
along. Barbara needed a way to become more aware of the passing of time,
so after much frustration, she supplemented what she was already doing
with her PDA. "I'm becoming totally dependent on it," she announced one
day during a phone check-in. "I have alarms for everything, and for
fifteen minutes before everything I have to do. I don't know what I
would do without it. I can't rely on myself to look at my watch, so this
is great." She also thought that she needed more visual cues to help her
stick with the plan, so she used a whiteboard in her office with
outlines of upcoming

plans to keep them front and center in her consciousness. Mind Mapping

Mind maps can be used for anything that you're trying to put into order
or into perspective. Essentially, using stick figures, pictures, or
words, you brainstorm on unlined paper in pen or pencil, putting down
all thoughts or issues that come to your mind at that moment. Next, you
use colored markers to clump together similar thoughts or to draw arrows
connecting related thoughts. If the ideas need to be broken down
further, you can transfer the groups of similar thoughts to other
individual pieces of paper, continuing in this way until you've seen
each detail separately. You can do it by hand or use any of the many
software programs that exist for this purpose. Using an Administrative
Assistant

Even with the many visual cues she'd engineered, Barbara was still
floundering. Since it was clear to me that much of her earlier success
had been predicated on accountability and teamwork, I suggested that she
consider using an administrative assistant. She needed to work with
someone who would be willing to handle her calendar, someone who would
take seriously her need to be reminded---and rereminded---of meetings,
deadlines, and projects, no matter how small. "I'd be lost without my
personal assistant," has been a common refrain among clients of mine who
are plagued by distractibility. One client would have her secretary call
her every thirty minutes starting two hours before she had to be at a
meeting. Another, in order to take breaks during long meetings, would
have his assistant page him so he could leave for ten minutes to take a
walk and clear his head. In addition to a personal assistant in whom she
had implicit trust, Barbara needed to train subordinates to whom she
could delegate responsibilities, people who would deliver frequent
written and verbal reports on the status of projects. By surrounding
herself with people who reported to her regularly, she'd be simulating
the environment in which she had experienced previous success, one based
on teamwork and accountability. Obviously, it may not be possible to
hire a new person to become your assistant, so you'll have to work with
what is possible to effect the changes

you need. I've trained my own assistants over a long period of time, and
little things have made a big difference. I've told them, for example,
not to let me keep the office door closed for more than fifteen minutes
without checking to make sure I'm on task. The point is to be active in
initiating the changes you seek, even if they seem like minor ones in
the beginning. The cumulative effect of small changes will be a
significant improvement in your ability to accomplish your goals. E.
EVALUATING

Being honest about progress during change is never easy for anybody, but
Barbara couldn't afford not to be. She needed to understand how
important it was to re-create the environment in which she had been
successful, one where she was responsible to someone, even as she
fulfilled her responsibilities for others. Strategies to self-manage
were part of her plan to take control of her life, but she also had to
accept the role her assistant could play in managing her. But because
that could happen only if her relationship with her new assistant,
Rebecca, were truthful, open, and consistent, she had to learn to accept
feedback as honest observation, not judgmental criticism. She also had
to remember that, as difficult as it might be to hear what Rebecca had
to say, it would be just as difficult for Rebecca to critique the boss,
which was a reversal of the natural order of things. Barbara would have
to give her assistant permission and encouragement to observe her and
rein her in when she became distracted, not an easy thing when it's done
from a professionally subordinate position. She would have to be as
transparent as possible with Rebecca about what she needed to accomplish
at any given time. The first thing her assistant said was that Barbara
should work with only one file on her desk at a time instead of the mass
of files that she always had. Each morning, Rebecca would come into
Barbara's office with only one set of files pertaining to one project
and then not give Barbara any other files until she had completed the
amount of work in the particular time segment she'd allotted for that
one project. Rebecca also said that she was usually aware of Barbara's
deadlines, yet she would see Barbara doing other things that didn't
pertain to the project at hand. "I see you staring off into space or
sharpening a whole box of pencils

or doing e-mails when you're supposed to be working on a report," she
told Barbara. In response, Barbara asked Rebecca to point out such
behavior each time she observed it. "But in the beginning that was
really hard to take," Barbara admitted. "Who wants somebody pointing out
everything you're doing wrong, even when you tell them to! I wanted to
tell her to get lost sometimes, but she was really patient and
consistent with me, which made it easier." Many of my clients have
created other strategies for staying productive. An especially helpful
one for those who spend a lot of time in the office engaged in
time-wasting activities is to pretend someone is watching you. By
pretending there's a webcam or hidden camera in your office monitoring
your every move, you eventually learn to self-monitor. Have in your
mind's eye that your boss or your colleagues are watching you. It can
make a big difference in keeping you on task!

WITHIN THE BRAIN: DISTRACTIBILITY

by John J. Ratey, M.D. Persons with ADHD have a "sluggish" frontal
cortex, which results in many of the manifestations of ADHD. Directly
affecting focus is the ability of the frontal cortex to help block the
entry or inhibit the entrance of other stimuli into our consciousness.
If the frontal cortex is not working properly, the result is
distractibility. Also, owing to lowered amounts of dopamine in the
synapse in the striatum, the reward and motivation area of the brain,
the attention of individuals with ADHD doesn't remain motivated enough
or fixed on a topic. It flips instead to the next new, and often random,
stimulus that comes into awareness. Increased dopamine helps rein in
attention by making a particular stimulus more important. For example,
rewarding, challenging, or intense thoughts or external stimuli can
cause an increase in dopamine in the synapse, helping to increase focus
and decrease distractibility. This is why medications such as Ritalin,
which increase dopamine levels, are used to help correct attention
issues such as distractibility.

R. REPEAT THE PROCESS

Barbara learned over time to alter strategies to suit new circumstances,
and her vigilance and willingness to repeat the A-N-S-W-E-R process paid
off. By engineering her environment to match her strengths, she was as
successful

as her superiors had predicted she would be when they promoted her in
the first place. Strategies for Those Derailed by Distraction If you
relate to Barbara, please know that just as she created strength-based
strategies, so can you. I've had clients who write on their bathroom
mirrors with dry-erase markers to remind them of their priorities for
that week, and others who pretend to be taking notes during meetings to
stay alert. Try any of the following, adapting them to your own needs
and style. FILTER OUT BACKGROUND NOISE TO ENHANCE FOCUS

Distractible individuals are overly responsive to both the external
stimuli of their environment and the internal stimuli of their own
thought processes. They act on the stimuli, jumping from thing to thing
or thought to thought, captive to every whim and fancy. Be honest about
the kind of environment that suits you. To avoid getting carried away
and lost, you might have to put yourself in a setting that is completely
free of distractions---nothing on the walls, no music or ringing phones,
total quiet. FIND THE RIGHT PLACE THAT WORKS FOR YOU

If you know that working in a totally quiet space doesn't help you
concentrate, then give yourself permission to go to a café or a coffee
shop, someplace that has a bit of a "buzz" in the background. Many of my
clients leave the office for a while and go to such a place to work on a
particular project. They say that the "buzz" helps to activate their
brain to screen out the background noise so they can focus. USE MUSIC TO
STAY ON TRACK

When I need to put in several hours of writing, I have one CD that I
play over and over again. I use this particular CD only to write to.
I've trained myself to sit down and start to work as soon as it begins
playing. It took a while, but it works. Try it! BE AWARE OF THE PASSING
OF TIME

Wear a sports watch and set it to beep every hour on the hour to help
you "hear the passing of time." When it beeps, stop and do a self-check.
Ask yourself, "Am I doing what I am supposed to be doing?" CREATE
SELF-ACCOUNTABILITY EVERY HOUR ON THE HOUR

To make sure you stay on course and focus on what you need to be
doing--- and to learn to be accountable to yourself---take a Post-it
note or a blank piece of paper and write down the three tasks you will
complete over the next hour. At the end of the hour, throw away the
piece of paper or Post-it note and write down your next three to-do
items on a new sheet. These need to be concrete and doable, things like
"Call Charlie" or "Water plants" or "Mail letter." Knowing that you have
to complete the tasks within the designated time will keep you moving so
that you don't hyperfocus on one activity to the exclusion of the others
on your list. PARK IT!

Whenever you get the urge to veer off course, park it. Designate a
notebook or an electronic file for those extraneous thoughts that pop
up. Get them out of your head and onto a piece of paper, delegate them
to another time and day, and keep going. This way, you feel as though
you've acted on whatever it was, so it's out of your head and therefore
out of your mind. If you're someone who often complains that great ideas
come to you in the middle of meetings or when you're concentrating on
something else, you can capture those ideas by writing them down as they
occur to you. This helps you gain more control over your creative ideas
and your distracted mind, and it provides a way to follow up on your
many great ideas. MAKE IT A PERSONAL POLICY NOT TO MAKE STOPS EN ROUTE

Many of my clients, already on the verge of being late for a meeting or
appointment, will decide to make a quick stop at a store or run a quick
errand on the way. History, of course, will tell you the consequences of
these actions: getting stressed, being even later, missing your
appointment altogether, disappointing others, and beating yourself up
for repeating the same mistake over and over again.

Post a sign on your dashboard that reads, "Don't Stop!" If you walk or
use public transportation, stick a Post-it note on your wallet reminding
you, "Go Directly to Work!" or, "Go Directly Home!" And do what it says!
AVOID THOSE TRAPS!

Don't fool yourself into thinking, "Oh, I can read one more e-mail
before I leave for my appointment," or, "I can do X, Y, and Z really
quickly before I go." Don't listen to that voice inside your head! It
will only get you into trouble. "Just one more minute" doesn't give you
more time; it only makes you late. If you know, for example, that e-mail
distracts you, use a timer to signal you to turn off your computer an
hour before your appointment. BEWARE OF "SEE DO"

Most of my clients respond well to their immediate physical environment,
meaning they get caught in what they call the "see do" cycle and forget
their designated priorities. They answer each e-mail that comes in, for
instance, or notice dry plants and begin watering, or look for a snack
and start cleaning out the refrigerator. If this describes you, set up
visual cues to keep you on track. Post signs to yourself like "Complete
project X by 5:00," or create a screen saver to scroll across your
computer screen reading, "Where Is Project X?" For longer-term goals and
follow-through, you might want to post a calendar over your desk or in
your kitchen with the due dates marked clearly in neon colors. NOW VS.
NOT NOW

Ask yourself, "Does this have to be done by today?" If it doesn't, type
or write it into your calendar with the date by which it needs to be
done. Then you know that for now, it's dealt with. If you follow this
process all the way through your list, you'll be left with only the
things that must be completed now. One of my clients uses this strategy
to help him prioritize his to-do lists so that he's always working on
the most important things on the list. He says it reduces his temptation
to act on nonessential items, and best of all, it keeps him honest.

"If I have a long list to handle every day, I'm setting myself up for
failure," he said. "I'm lying to myself. I've promised myself a million
times that I'll finish the entire to-do list, but it's impossible. In
the end, I look at all the undone items and feel demoralized . . .
again. So I got rid of the lists, and it works for me, especially
because nothing gets forgotten." Maybe his strategy will work for you!
PREPARE AHEAD OF TIME

If you know you're frequently late to appointments because you get
distracted, prepare as much as you can the day before the appointment.
Put the files you need in your briefcase, the PowerPoint files on your
computer desktop, your coat by the door, and so on. Do anything you can
to make it as easy as possible for you to simply grab what you need and
run. USE DISTRACTIONS AS REWARDS

Come up with a list of things you know will distract you, and use them
as rewards. Plug in these items upon completion of a task or at the end
of a designated time segment. One client, for example, knew that
computer games were definitely a distraction, so he scheduled playing a
few into his work plan to keep him motivated. By saying, "If I work one
hour on my report, I can spend ten minutes on computer games," he was
able to complete his reports. Do whatever fits! For this strategy, you
have to ask yourself, "Is the reward motivating enough to keep me
working at my assigned task no matter how hard it is for me to stick
with it?" You also have to be very careful that you keep the reward time
limited. If not, it will become a distraction again rather than a
reward.

I've coached many clients like Barbara, and although it hasn't been
easy, it really has been fun. The strategies that we've created might
seem outrageous to other people, but I can say unequivocally that
they've worked. Try your own, and be as creative as you want!
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 9

Transitions

"I know what everybody thinks," William said in our initial conversation
about coaching, "but they're clueless. Yeah, it's true," he conceded, "I
probably look like I have it made---a great family, an unbelievable
salary, the whole package. But nobody knows the half of it," he
insisted, "the way I feel like I'm losing it half the time." I could
picture from his comments that William's office also appeared perfect,
everything neat and organized and in its place, his files all labeled
and in order. "I don't like messes," he said, "and I make sure everybody
at the office knows to leave my stuff alone," which undoubtedly added to
others' perception that here was a man in charge of his world. As he
indicated, though, it took a lot of energy to maintain that rigid aura
of perfection, and he was feeling its weight. Things needed to change.
The sense of failure, guilt, and overwhelming anxiety that William
carried were too heavy a price to pay for the image he'd tried to
project. As a coach, I've heard versions of William's lament over and
again from my clients, the disconnect between the way they're perceived
and the way they feel, the overwhelming burden they carry of reconciling
how they appear to others and how they feel about themselves. Each
version of reality has its own set of expectations and judgments, and
neither is easy to navigate for an adult with ADHD. A Pattern at Work

In one sense, people had been correct in their observation about
William's professional success. Unlike many of my clients, who find
themselves distracted and impulsive and stretched all over the map,
William had long exercised control over his own tiny universe, in which
everything had its place and he knew he could function. As he readily
admitted, things at the office ran smoothly, thanks in no small measure
to the decade-long relationship he shared with his assistant, Lynn,
whose understanding of William's particular needs had deepened with each
passing year. "I love work," he told me, "because I know I'm good at
what I do. But without Lynn, who knows where I'd be," he added,
acknowledging the crucial role Lynn continued to play in creating and
maintaining the structures so necessary in William's world. "If anybody
ever found out how dependent I am on her, they'd think I was such a
loser," he said. Before he'd hired Lynn, William had struggled to
complete tasks, spending hours trying to wrap up projects and losing
track of time in the process. Because he rarely blocked out sufficient
time to prepare for upcoming meetings, he was constantly shuffling and
rearranging papers at the last minute, racing out the door but arriving
late anyway, frenzied and frazzled and stressed beyond imagination. He
had also been perceived as inaccessible, and he admitted to snapping at
people when he was interrupted. "I'd get totally thrown, and it would
sometimes take me hours to get back to what I was doing," he said about
his earlier behavior at the office. "And it was always hard for me to
let anybody else do things. I know how I want things done, and I
couldn't stand it when they didn't do it my way. But Lynn gets me," he
said. "She definitely does." Although, as she'd told William on many
occasions, she hadn't immediately understood his idiosyncrasies, ten
years had given her deep insight into his need for regimentation and
control. To keep him in balance, Lynn had gradually begun to make sure
that each task, each part of his day, had been set up in advance so that
he could move out of one task and into the next with sufficient time.
Lynn had also served as William's professional organizer and "keeper of
the gate," taking responsibility to ward off the unexpected, any
unanticipated interruption that could send him into a tailspin. "It's
not all

that easy for me to focus," he said, "so once I'm immersed in something,
I can't stand distractions. Lynn makes sure nothing gets past her
that'll make me lose my concentration. I'm amazed sometimes at how she
doesn't need to be told anymore what I need her to do. She just does
it." Basically, Lynn had learned that William needed an established
routine, so she made sure that telephone calls, morning and afternoon
mail delivery, and meeting prenotification all occurred at specified
times. Continual reminders were also necessary, so she established a
color-coded calendar system of immediate, upcoming, and long-range
meetings and projects. Over the years, Lynn had engineered the
environment for William so that he could move from one task to another
without being startled and stressed by an unwelcome change of plan. The
more Lynn understood and acted on behalf of William's needs, the more
William had been willing to surrender to her the control over his
environment that he desperately needed. It was a perfect working
relationship: As Lynn took over control of the office, she gave back to
William control over his day and time. He might have continued to appear
to his coworkers as inflexible and obsessive about details, but his
office was running smoothly and things got accomplished. It wasn't what
happened at the office that had prompted William's call to me. It was
what happened after he left the office. A Pattern at Home Many of my
clients love the excitement of last-second deadlines and an unexpected
turn of events. "It's that rush that gets me to produce, even if it does
exact its pound of flesh from me and everybody around me," one client
told me. That's not how William functioned. He panicked at the unplanned
and could do nothing. Because of his inflexibility, he and his family
were suffering, but they didn't understand why. "I really want to help
Alene out," he said about his wife. "I want to be with the kids, I want
to be a good father, but I can never seem to do anything right at home.
I feel totally incompetent." Before he even turned off the car, he said,
Alene would be outside with a list: Take the kids to practice, pick up
their friends on the way, stop at the

deli. There was always something he hadn't expected, and it threw him
every time. Even though he never meant it to happen, he and Alene ended
up in screaming matches far too often. Many of my clients have talked
about similar behavior when they're caught off guard. They often lose
their temper, even with their children, and then they feel guilty and
remorseful for taking out their anxiety on people who don't deserve it.
William knew he couldn't be as flexible as Alene wanted him to be, and
he felt terrible that he was disappointing her. Trouble with Transitions
Like many people with ADHD, William had always felt trapped in the
present moment, making the transition from one activity to the next
stressful and close to impossible unless it had been well planned. At
the office, Lynn understood that he required a certain amount of time to
find closure in one activity before moving on to the next, so she built
adequate transition time into his daily routine. She also scheduled his
meetings far enough apart that he could mentally withdraw from one
before preparing for another, and she screened his phone calls and
messages so she could give him a sense of order in going through them
and in designating time to respond. Nothing, in other words, was left to
chance. As much as humanly possible, Lynn eliminated spontaneity from
William's workday, building into his routine a multilayered system of
structures that compensated for the difficulties with transitions that
he experienced on his own. But when he left the predictable environment
of work, William arrived at the unpredictable environment of home, where
chaos and kids are often synonymous. "I never know what I'll find when I
get there," he repeated, embarrassed by the admission but agitated as
well. He knew that Alene didn't understand how hard it was for him to
function at home, and he was demoralized and frustrated. Expectations
Transitioning from home to work was relatively easy for William because
he knew what to expect when he got to the office. There were few
surprises,

so he didn't panic in anticipation of what might occur. Coming from work
to home was a different story. The only thing he believed he could count
on was the unexpected. The anticipation of unscheduled activities,
changes in plans, and altered routines was a trigger that set him off
even before he arrived, and with no well of calm reserve on which to
draw, he often erupted. Home was an environment he couldn't control.
Like other clients who have problems with transitions, William didn't
know what to do. He didn't know what was expected of him. He panicked
when he had to transition from his role as account manager, where he
enjoyed success in an environment with set parameters, to his role as
husband and father, where on any given day somebody needed something
from him for which he hadn't been prepared. The A-N-S-W-E-R for William
Connected as we are through technology to the whole world at once---or
at least to a number of people at once---we have little choice but to
shift on demand as buzzers sound and phones ring. Then we're forced to
respond in kind, changing our focus and responsibility with each new
call to become boss, assistant, spouse, parent, stepparent, coach,
chauffeur, maid, tutor, and the host of other titles and job
descriptions that make up a life these days. "What a way to live," a new
client said about problems moving from one role or task into another. "I
swear, it used to take me so long to get into what I was doing that once
I did, I didn't even want to stop for lunch," he said. "I was always
afraid I wouldn't be able to get back into whatever I'd been doing once
I started doing something else." Transitioning often leaves those with
ADHD not only unable to catch up, but also in a state of panic and/or
paralysis. A. ACKNOWLEDGING THE ADHD

People with ADHD tend to overrespond to stimuli. Those with transition
problems interpret new stimuli as threats, which in turn causes the
minipanics associated with ADHD. Almost any change can be unsettling and
stressful---completing a task, taking a vacation, going from one
appointment to the next, or receiving unexpected news. What they need is
a

way to change roles without anxiety and fear of freezing or exploding,
even when those transitions have to be fast and immediate, coming
without warning or time to plan. The strengths and weaknesses with which
William dealt at work could transfer into other environments, so he
needed to replicate those conditions at home, even in the emotionally
charged atmosphere of family life, where being detached and objective
wasn't possible. The fact is, William depended on structure and
predictability, and when he feared losing the sense of control that
structure afforded, he was constantly on edge. Coming home was fraught
with anxiety, not only because of the potential for chaos, but also
because he had a hard time admitting to his wife what he perceived as a
weakness---his inability to handle spontaneous, unplanned activity. She,
in turn, had little understanding of his need to know ahead of time what
was expected, so the cycle of misunderstanding and resentment continued.
Professionally, William could execute plans successfully, but that was
because of the strategies he and Lynn had devised. "Alene is always
saying I don't pay attention to her and the kids the way I should,"
William said. "She doesn't understand why I can get things done at work
but can't follow through with anything---her words---at home." William
acknowledged that in order to improve life at home, he would have to
take control of his ADHD symptoms. One of the most important changes he
had to make was communicating more with Alene so she could understand
his need for structure and order. He also had to find a way to let go of
the defensive responses that automatically surfaced when he felt
threatened by the unforeseen. N. NARROWING THE FOCUS

People with ADHD have trouble self-inhibiting. Even though they know
intellectually that their overreactions don't make sense, they can be
easily unsettled when they have to "reorganize" their brain and change
focus. To initiate action to address the problem, and to let go of the
self-judgment that leaves them feeling crippled and unworthy, they need
to look at their struggles in one area through the same strategic lens
they use elsewhere. After exploring with me the conditions contributing
to his professional success, William understood that his need to control
was actually a strategic

method used to meet his needs. He narrowed his focus to dealing with two
specific areas at home: • Communicating more effectively with Alene •
Transitioning from his professional role as boss to his family role as
husband and father

Understanding and putting words to what he needed---communicating it
---would be key to minimizing the chaos and ending the guilt and
selfblame he felt when he couldn't meet his family's needs. S.
STRATEGIZING

In a misguided attempt to appear stronger than he really was, William
had never acknowledged to his wife his specific needs and weaknesses.
Rather than risk seeming weak or vulnerable, he had kept everything
bottled up. Unfortunately, the frustration he then exhibited, the
inevitable dysfunction in the face of the unexpected, appeared to Alene
as controlling and rigid. If anything, William appeared willful and
inflexible rather than anxious and out of control, as he actually felt.
Strategies for Communication It was important for William to be open
with Alene about his ADHD. He needed to tell her that he wanted to meet
her needs and that he wasn't trying to be rigid and inflexible. But it
was equally important that he communicate to her his difficulty shifting
gears without warning so she could let him know, as far in advance as
possible, exactly what she expected of him. SCHEDULE TIME FOR TALKING

"It's really hard for people who don't have ADHD to know what it's
like," one of my clients told me, which I know is true. It's easy to
misconstrue erratic behavior and assign negative motives to what those
with ADHD sometimes do, so perhaps Alene could be excused for wondering
just what William's actions at home meant. On the other hand, William
was not his ADHD, and it was important that both partners separate the
person from the behavior, which could happen only through communication
and hard work. First they needed to set aside time for serious
discussion---and if possible, the same time each week, so it would be
scheduled---when the

children were asleep or with a sitter and when there were no other
pressing needs. That way, they could freely communicate their thoughts
and feelings to each other without distractions. Many couples, believing
that they already know everything they need to know about each other,
resist such structured communication time, but when one of the partners
has ADHD, it's not only important, it can also be marriage saving. PARK
IT!

Knowing that they had a scheduled time to talk about what was on their
minds, William and Alene could then "park" the issues, especially the
potentially loaded or toxic ones, until later. By writing them down for
eventual discussion, they could be certain that the issues wouldn't be
lost among the many other things that inevitably arose. They could also
achieve a measure of distance and objectivity by waiting until a less
emotional time, not unlike the old trick of counting to ten before
sounding off. The key was for both partners to be open and comfortable
expressing what they were thinking and feeling. They also needed to be
able to state their needs and challenges without interruption or blame,
and they had to believe that they were in this together, neither one
carrying a greater burden or compromising more than the other. THINK IN
TERMS OF THREE

To help eliminate blame and finger-pointing, I suggested to William that
he and Alene try thinking beyond their individual selves to their
existence as a couple, a discrete entity that needed to be nurtured
every bit as much as each of them did separately. In a marriage, after
all, one partner's problems never exist in a vacuum, and solutions for
one are often new problems for the other. In their planned talks,
William and Alene had to focus on strengthening the relationship, a
third entity that they could work on together, shifting the problem and
solution from either of them individually to what they held in common.
DATE NIGHT

William and Alene were not unlike many couples who completely lose touch
with each other in the chaos of daily living. Interactions had become
almost exclusively about house issues or the kids, and as William had
implied, there was little intimacy left in their relationship.

But in order for intimacy to occur, there had to be a certain level of
trust and safety between them. Communicating during their scheduled
talks was an important step toward that trust, but it wasn't the only
one. Just as important was the need for romance and good old-fashioned
courtship, which they could begin to recapture through planned dates,
specific times that they set aside for fun as they used to when they
were single. Anything that brought them together as a couple---dinner at
a favorite restaurant, an evening walk after dinner at home, an
overnight at an inn---was what mattered. Life hadn't always been about
the mundane details and hassles of getting through the day, and they
needed to remember what had brought them together in the first place.
They also needed to express it, to say out loud what they loved and
respected about each other. As artificial as it may sound, that kind of
planning and sticking to it is essential for people with ADHD,
especially for someone like William, who needed to prepare in advance
for what he'd be doing. Strategies for Smoother Transitions CHECKING IN

Because one of his goals in coaching was to establish ways to make
transitions easier to handle, William began checking in with Alene as he
was about to leave the office each day. By determining before he got
home what he could expect when he arrived, he could plan for what was
coming and even rehearse his actions and responses on the drive to his
house. WINDING DOWN

One of my clients leaves her office during lunchtime each day to eat at
the nearby harbor. "If the weather is good, I sit on the lawn, and when
it's not, I stay in the car," she said. "I just need to take some time
by myself before I start the second half of my day." To make the
transition from work to home more gradual, and to buy him a little time
between roles, I suggested that strategy to William. He could take a
short break on the way home, ten to fifteen minutes in a quiet place
somewhere to relax and unwind from the office. Even if he simply sat in
his car for a little while before starting the drive, the idea was to
disconnect

completely from his work responsibilities so he could freely assume his
home responsibilities. PLANNING TOGETHER AS A FAMILY

When I was growing up and living in different countries, one of the ways
my father kept our family structured was by posting a huge calendar in a
central location in the house. Each of us contributed ideas and noted
responsibilities on it, and to this day, I remember how important I felt
to have even a small say in what we were going to be doing. I suggested
a similar idea to William so he could see ahead of time what was coming
up in the children's schedules and plan accordingly. The calendar would
also give him a chance to establish backup plans for the inevitable
changes in schedule that would occur, and it would reinforce for Alene
the importance of letting William know as far in advance as possible if
things were not going to go as arranged. By planning ahead for what to
do just in case, Alene and William could avoid the criticizing and
finger-pointing that had unfortunately become the norm. And as they
worked together on how to deal with unexpected changes, William could
develop a new habit of response when he was in a situation he hadn't
anticipated. Even the time to write the weekly schedule on the calendar
could be planned---every Saturday morning or Monday night, for instance,
or whatever time everybody could be together. Several months into
coaching, William reported some success. "The kids needed to have
ownership in the process instead of having it imposed on them, so now
they're learning some structure, too," he said. W. WORKING THE PLAN

William and Alene had to be very clear on their roles and expectations
and very careful to keep their communication active and constant. No
matter how productive any single conversation happened to be, they could
not then dismiss the subject as settled. Nor could they forget the
importance of intimacy in their relationship. Couples have to take the
time to foster intimacy. It doesn't just happen, and people with ADHD
often don't slow down and consider things like vacations or time alone
as part of what is needed to help their relationship

thrive. If neither William nor Alene could handle details of
reservations or vacation plans, then they could seek the services of a
travel agent. Finally, William had to accept the fact that his home
environment would remain unpredictable. He was a husband and a father,
and as such, he would always be dealing with the human dimension of
those roles. The only thing that could, and would, change was how he
would function in each role. It was up to him, with the help of Alene,
to build into his day the time he needed to transition from businessman
to family member. And he had to keep at it, working the plan even when
his enthusiasm for doing so had waned! E. EVALUATING THE PLAN

"It's all about calmness," I heard from a client. "The calmer the
transition, the more planned it is, then I'm fine. As soon as it gets to
be a last minute scramble, then I'm crazy and more frustrated, but I
have it figured out. I still tend to get pretty anxious about my ability
to pull it all off, so I've learned to plan way in advance for handling
family matters." William borrowed from that client's approach. "Alene
and I started writing things down," he said after a few months, "and it
got much better. I don't feel so ambushed anymore. We got a notebook
just for this, and she writes what she wants done instead of telling me
all the time, and I check the book once a week and cross things off as I
do them. Things stay calmer that way." R. REPEATING THE PLAN

"Before I actually institutionalized the coaching plan into my life, I
had much higher stress and wasn't nearly as resilient when the
transition was necessary," a client told me as he reflected on his
experience with coaching. "I realized that this was definitely not
serving me or anybody around me, so it was a cumulative effect, and I
realized that I had to do something. Once it was validated by reading
all the material and educating myself about ADHD, I had to acknowledge
it and work with it to the point where it wasn't an obstacle." Like any
behavioral shift, it takes effort, but once you realize how much better
it makes your life, you'll know that it's been worth it. William worked
hard at communicating his needs to his wife, and she helped build

an environment at home where he didn't feel so out of control.
Communicating was sometimes difficult for each of them, but they learned
through trial and error just how important it was to William's
functioning and their relationship. Strategies for Those with Transition
Troubles Strategies for making smoother transitions focus on ways to
lessen the panic by making the transition more gradual. Many of my
clients have adapted the following strategies to their particular needs.
USE THE POWER OF VISUALIZATION

When making transitions, no matter how big or small, do "dry runs" in
your head over and over again. Visualize every detail you can in making
the transition. Sketch out times for ending each activity and starting
the next. You need not follow the times exactly, but have an idea of
when you will need to be switching gears. See yourself moving from one
activity to the next.

WITHIN THE BRAIN: TRANSITIONS

by John J. Ratey, M.D. Evolutionarily, the startle response helps to
protect us when we encounter new situations or ones that we perceive as
threatening. Parts of our attention system are key in the startle: the
amygdala and the frontal cortex. The amygdala, which I call "the
intensity button," helps produce the response, and the frontal cortex
inhibits and modulates it. When the amygdala is engaged, we startle and
react by fight, flight, or fear. In individuals with ADHD, the amygdala
may be overreactive. The inhibitory abilities of the prefrontal cortex
to still the amygdala and other emotional regions of the brain are less
than optimal most of the time. This contributes to an overresponsiveness
to stimuli with too much passion, too much emotion, or too much fear,
quickly exciting the amygdala. The transition or change in the
environment may be, and usually is, inconsequential, but the "startle"
requires some reorganization on the part of the brain and shifting of
focus. It can be very unsettling and cause an inner noisy state of high
stress and anxiety. This is when a minipanic ensues. Individuals with
ADHD are thrown off track and into a new situation they interpret as
filled with chaos. This causes them to feel lost and threatened. It
disrupts their sense of context of their experience, and their

anxiety in the situation is out of proportion. Without context, the
discontinuity of the experience makes their anxiety worse.

LEARN TO LET GO

To transition successfully from one project to another, you need to
learn to "let go" of the first and move on to the next. Many of my
clients become perfectionists when it's time to move on to another
project, and they find it hard to wrap up what they've been doing. If
this is your tendency, set a specific stop time, then allow yourself
fifteen more minutes and that's all. No more! You can always go back to
the first project later, but the idea here is to keep moving forward.
DETAILED PLANNING

To have smoother transitions, you must be able to see beyond the moment.
Sketch out detailed plans for at least three days at a time. This can
help you (1) see more clearly what is coming up; and (2) identify
priority items. Remove items from your schedule that can wait, and
adjust accordingly when "unexpected" things crop up. CREATE A
"WIND-DOWN" ROUTINE FOR TRANSITIONS

This strategy is particularly useful for those who have assistants. Make
an arrangement whereby your assistant will call you two hours before
your appointed meeting, then an hour and a half before, and again an
hour before, telling you each time exactly how long you have until the
meeting. If you don't have an assistant, use a stopwatch and set
wind-down goals for each time juncture. For example, two hours before
your meeting, start wrapping up whatever you're working on; an hour and
a half before, prepare your files for the meeting; an hour before,
finish everything you need for the meeting. If necessary, mark this plan
out on paper with designated times and check off each step as it comes
up. THE ROLES BINDER

Use a three-section binder to ease the transition from one role to
another, and label each section as one of your roles---"Social Worker,"
"Wife," "Mother," for example. Then list the daily activities for each
role. As the last activity is completed, add notes to wrap up that role
to put closure to it.

Then open to the section for the upcoming role and look over the
responsibilities and activities you listed. This will allow you to end
one role and start mentally focusing on the new one. WAIT TWENTY, THEN
APPROACH

There is nothing worse for you and the people in your family than having
a fight ensue five minutes after you walk in the door from work. Ask
your spouse to give you twenty to thirty minutes after you've arrived
home to "decompress." This eases the transition from work to family.
Strategies for Communication and Fostering a Relationship LISTEN!

Don't assume that you know what your partner is thinking and jump to
conclusions too fast. Try to listen actively to the other person's
viewpoint. Breathe, take a minute, ask questions, and try to verify both
your partner's feelings and your own. MINIMIZE COMPETING STIMULI BEFORE
TALKING

Does your mind wander when having a conversation with your significant
other? Be sure to turn off the TV, your computer, or anything else that
can distract you or take you away from the conversation. Have your
partner ask you to maintain eye contact while talking. This way, you
have a better a chance of staying focused on the situation at hand. WALK
AND TALK

If you have problems sitting and listening when your significant other
is trying to talk to you, suggest that you take a walk while you talk.
Movement helps keep the brain more alert and will help you stay more
engaged. COMMUNICATE IN NONTOXIC WAYS

Instead of screaming at each other, try speaking to each other in a calm
and encouraging manner. Begin suggestions with "I need" or "I feel
that," not phrases like "You don't" or "You always." Attempt to maintain
eye contact

when you're speaking to each other. This way, you both have a better
chance of staying focused on the topic under discussion. TAKE
RESPONSIBILITY

Learn as much as you can about ADHD. Don't assign character flaws.
Inconsistency in behavior, mood swings, and overpromising or
underdelivering can lead to issues with trust. It's important to be able
to explain the neurobiology of ADHD and realize that certain "traits"
are directly connected to ADHD. Just be sure not to use ADHD as an
excuse. TIME-OUT

Effective communication also involves knowing when not to talk! There
will be times when you and your spouse will have to recognize heightened
tensions that exist between you and cut off the discussion. Agree to
walk away for a few minutes to clear your heads. BE THERE!

People with ADHD tend to get into an "all or nothing" mind frame and
never get around to taking a break from work to have fun in their lives.
How often do you see your significant other? How present are you in his
or her life? How can you expect to maintain a solid relationship with
someone if you're never around? If you make the effort to plan dates
with your significant other, your relationship will be better for it.
Have a travel agent book an annual trip for the two of you. Make it a
ritual so you don't have to think about it. And don't even think about
skipping it. Spending time together shouldn't be just a promise you
make. It should be a reality. DON'T LEAVE THEM WAITING

"Why can't you ever be on time? I told you about these reservations!
Forget it. You're never here." Sound familiar? If it does, you need to
analyze what it is that makes you late. For example, don't start working
on a complicated project when you have only thirty minutes until your
dinner date. Don't convince yourself that making that one call you have
avoided all day will "just take a second." That "just one second" can
lead to a very exasperated and hurt partner.

Strategies for Fostering Family Communication MAKE IT A TEAM EFFORT!

No one lives in isolation in a family environment. Everyone's actions or
lack of actions can have profound effects on the entire family unit.
Make a family calendar of events, and involve everyone. GIVE IT
PERSONALITY!

Own that calendar by giving it your family's personality. Post it in a
common area, and personalize it with photos and drawings as well as
important upcoming dates, games, tests, and so on. Kids love having
input and seeing that their activities are important to the whole
family. They're also likely to assume more responsibility for themselves
when they feel valued. MEALTIME MOMENTS

Make weekend meals family specials by giving everyone a chance to share
an accomplishment or a special event from the preceding or upcoming
week. Talk about family plans, and initiate activities that everyone can
engage in. Mealtime should not be for problem solving, so keep the
conversation upbeat and positive!

Regardless of the challenges you're facing, it's important to recognize
that those challenges have been, and will continue to be, ongoing.
You'll need to be vigilant in telling yourself to stay on course,
because no matter how many strategies you ultimately create, you can
still be your own worst enemy, falling into the ADHD trap of forgetting
the pain you've experienced in the past. Without serious commitment to
the A-N-S-W-E-R process, you can easily repeat, again and again, the
negative cycles in which you've been trapped. Whether you select
strategies for procrastination, impulsivity, or any of the other
symptoms described in the previous chapters, you'll need to recognize
the following: 1. No matter how subconscious it might have been, you
probably did employ strategies in all facets of your life to get to
where you are today.

2. These old strategies are no longer effective or sufficient. 3. You
have to identify the triggers that lure you off course. 4. You need to
identify your strengths. 5. You need to develop new strategies to handle
your responsibilities. 6. Successful strategies are highly
individualized, and finding them is a trial-and-error process. 7. You
have to be vigilant and dedicated to make changes in your life.

OceanofPDF.com

PART III

Strategies for a Balanced Life

Now that you've read about coaching in general, and the A-N-S-W-E-R in
particular, especially as it has applied to my clients, you've learned
several things about living with ADHD. You know that ADHD is not a
character flaw and that having it doesn't mean you're a failure, someone
destined to disappoint yourself and others for the rest of your life.
You can let go of that negative tape. You also know that ADHD is a
neurobiological disorder that you can't simply wish away. But as my
clients' stories illustrate, you can compensate for its effects. You can
take charge and change the direction of your life. If you have ADHD,
you've probably recognized yourself in the symptoms and behaviors of the
individuals about whom you've read. And even though, as a teaching tool,
I chose to highlight only one ADHD symptom for each client, it's fair to
say that I could probably have featured the same client in each chapter.
Those of us with ADHD manifest many symptoms, so if you found yourself
thinking, "Oh, that's me, I always lose track of time," when you read
about Claire, and then, "Wait a minute, I have the same problems going
from one setting to another," when you read about William, you're just
like the rest of us. We're impulsive and we procrastinate and we're
easily distracted, even as we hyperfocus and get

bogged down in details. We're multifaceted, for sure, and we're
multisymptomatic. But we're also resourceful and creative, which is
where coaching comes in. You've seen that structure is central to the
tenets of coaching I've outlined for you, the single most important
check on typical ADHD behavior. And you've learned that strategizing is
the way to build structure in your life. Each strategy you create should
be specifically designed to compensate for what your ADHD brain,
unchecked, might lead you to do. You know that change will come from
finding a way to use your strengths to work against your weaknesses. The
point of coaching is to look objectively at what you want to change and
then to create strategies that work for you, being as creative as you
need to be. Whether you hire a professional or decide to coach yourself,
you know you have to commit to the process if you're going to make the
changes you seek. You also have to be honest and resilient, and you have
to be accountable. If you're like many of my clients, with a history of
selfdelusion and covering up, none of those qualities will come easily
in the beginning, but a coach or trusted partner can help you develop
them into new habits. It was true for me, and you've seen from my
clients' stories that it can be true for you. As you've also seen,
there's no magic here. We who have ADHD struggle to keep our symptoms
from controlling us, so let me repeat again: We must create structure
and strategies to compensate for our symptoms. We learn from one
another, we try out what has worked for somebody else, and we continue
to experiment until we get it right. Then, because we continue to
evolve, we adjust and try again. Earlier in the book, I asked you to
copy into your notebook or computer file the following table of ADHD
symptoms and outcomes, but now I've added "ADHD Cause."

SYMPTOM Has a poor sense of time

ADHD CAUSE

OUTCOME Always late Accomplishes little

Seen as undependable Difficulty prioritizing

Often disappoints others Does work on wrong projects Avoids important
tasks

Acting before thinking; getting bored easily

Spotty employment history Can't maintain relationships Can't tolerate
boredom

Easily sidetracked from goal

Jumps from task to task Doesn't listen to others Misses deadlines

Inflexible; stuck in details

Can't let go Too controlling Easily agitated

Looking at the table now, you can probably guess why I originally left
the ADHD causes blank. I wanted you to read about my clients first so
you'd have a context for understanding the ADHD cause at the root of
their behavior. With my clients' stories in mind, look at the completed
table:

SYMPTOM

ADHD CAUSE

OUTCOME

Has a poor sense of time

Time mismanagement

Always late Accomplishes little Seen as undependable

Difficulty prioritizing

Procrastination

Often disappoints others Does work on wrong projects Avoids important
tasks

Acting before thinking; getting bored easily

Impulsivity

Spotty employment history Can't maintain relationships Can't tolerate
boredom

Easily sidetracked from goal

Distractibility

Jumps from task to task Doesn't listen to others Misses deadlines

Inflexible; stuck in details

Trouble with transitions

Can't let go Too controlling Easily agitated

To learn to self-initiate change and move forward, Claire, Sam, and the
others had to separate themselves from their ADHD and know what was
causing them to mismanage time or procrastinate or fall into any of the
other ADHD traps wreaking havoc with their lives. Now you know that you
have the same obligation to yourself. You have to learn as much as you
can about your own ADHD so that you can understand the cause of your
behavior and separate yourself from what you do. Earlier, I asked you to
make a table of your own symptoms and outcomes in your coaching
notebook. Go back to that table now and try to fill in the column marked
"ADHD Cause." Charting your own ADHD symptoms, causes, and outcomes is
an important step in moving forward. Once you know what's causing the
behavior you want to change, you can think about strategies to
accomplish your goal. While I was writing this book, I had the chance to
reconnect with many former clients, all of whom generously offered
comments and suggestions. "Strategies," I kept hearing. "Give as many as
you can! We can definitely use them!"

In response to my clients' requests, I offer the next three chapters,
each a compilation of strategies for aspects of balanced living that
were not covered earlier. These strategies can serve as a guide to daily
functioning, from getting through mundane, practical details of the day
to enriching the spiritual side of who you are. I know that they work.
I've talked about them at conferences and in various articles, and I've
heard again and again that they make a difference for people coping with
ADHD. If one doesn't work for you, try another. The key is to find
something that will help you accomplish your goals, use it for as long
as it works, and try something new when you need to. All of this,
remember, has one goal in mind. As I told you earlier, this is a book
about possibility. May it help you take control, maintain control, and
love the way you live. OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 10

Strategies for the Home Environment

People with ADHD often live in chaotic environments. They misplace
things, they jump from project to project randomly, and they leave
things incomplete or undone. Lacking skills to prioritize, seeing
everything as "equal," and not keeping things in short-term memory all
contribute to making the tedious tasks of daily living---staying on top
of finances, grocery shopping, laundry, or clutter---stifling. With the
proper approach, these tasks can be managed and then mastered! Finances
UNDERSTAND THE COST BENEFIT OF DELEGATING

If you're like most people with ADHD, you avoid details such as keeping
up on bank accounts and paying bills on a regular basis. The thought of
sitting down, sifting through mail, and writing checks is enough to make
you run from the task, not toward it. Nonetheless, bills need to be paid
or you'll continue to get late notices, accrue bad credit, or run the
risk of getting your electricity turned off, not to mention upsetting
others who depend on you. If this describes you, learn to delegate. Pay
someone to keep track of your finances. Arrange for bills to be paid
automatically via your bank. Do what you can to get the job done. In the
end, it will cost you less than you're spending in late fees. SEPARATE
THE TASK FROM THE SETUP

To make paying bills easier and less painful, do the setup first before
paying the bills, which is the real task. Equip a "bill-paying station"
with your checkbook, stamps, envelopes, and a basket in which to collect
the bills when they arrive in the mail. On a designated day, open the
bills and stamp the return envelopes. On the next day, put your return
address on the envelopes. On the next day, write and sign the checks.
Then all you have to do is stuff the envelopes and send them! By
separating the setup and execution, and by approaching the task step by
step, you won't find it so overwhelming, and the job will get done.
CREATE ACCOUNTABILITY

I have several clients who meet with their accountant every three months
simply to make sure they keep up with their finances. If this is
something your accountant is willing to do, go for it! Your accountant
can help you create systems for budgeting and tracking your income.
Chances are, if left to your own devices, you'll get in trouble. Ask for
help from an expert. You don't have to do it alone. RITUALIZE IT

If you don't create space in your life for paying bills and reviewing
finances, it will never come to fruition and will stay only a wish. Set
a regular weekly time and place to pay bills and review your accounts.
Mark it as an appointment with yourself and don't skip it, no matter
what. Do it at the same time on the same day each week so it becomes a
habit. Remember to choose a day when you are least likely to be
distracted by a more entertaining activity. STAY IN THE KNOW TO SAY NO

Stay on top of how much money you have in your accounts and how much you
owe. For example, when you get your bank statement, highlight the
amounts and post it on the back of your door so you see it every day.
Lack of information about what funds are actually available to you at
any given time is a recipe for spending beyond your means and ultimately
for financial disaster. CREATE VISUAL REMINDERS

Keep track of when bills are due. Post dates on your calendar. Or here
is a favorite of one of my clients: "I open all the mail when it comes
in and immediately sort out the bills, highlight the due dates, and tape
them on the wall by the light switch. This way, I can quickly glance at
the wall and know how many bills I have to pay and when they are due.
Because they're right next to the light switch, I'm forced to look at
them at least once a day!" BUDGETING: CREATE A TRACKING SYSTEM

Keep track of receipts by labeling and carrying envelopes labeled
"Business," "Groceries," and so on. Put receipts in the appropriate
envelope when you pay for an item, and if you forget to get the receipt,
write the cost of the item on the outside of the envelope. At the end of
each month, file them away for your records in a small accordion-style
three-by-twelve expanding file. This strategy is great for tracking
receipts for expense reports, too. Laundry TAKE ACTION

People with ADHD are highly affected by their immediate environment.
It's very important, therefore, to keep your living area organized and
picked up. If you know you're challenged in keeping up with laundry,
take measures to get it done. Either delegate it by hiring someone to do
it or send it out to be done. Set a specific day of the week to do that,
and write it on your calendar. Otherwise, the vicious cycle of having it
pile up while you avoid it will continue. A messy environment also puts
a strain on relationships and on those around you, so that's another
reason to take action. MAKE IT ROUTINE

You must create the time and space for laundry. Otherwise, doing it will
remain only a wish. Set a time and day to do it on a regular basis.
Think this out and make it realistic. Don't say you'll do it Sunday
mornings if you go to church! That's setting yourself up for failure. If
for some reason you can't do laundry on your designated laundry day,
have a backup day and time. This way, it doesn't pile up and become
unmanageable.

USE YOUR ENVIRONMENT

Planning to do it and doing it are two separate things. Be sure you have
systems in place to remember the day and time you have scheduled. Post a
note to yourself as a reminder, or put a sign over your laundry basket:
"Do on Tuesday Evening." This strategy worked so well for one of my
clients that when her fiancé saw the sign "Do Laundry on Wednesday," he
thought it was directed to him and he did the laundry! COMBINE IT WITH
ANOTHER ACTIVITY

While you're doing your laundry, also do another project or task you
engage in on a regular basis. This will help you to remember to do it
more readily, regularly, and painlessly. For example, designate as
laundry time Saturday mornings while reading the paper or Sunday
evenings while watching your favorite TV show. FOLLOW IT ALL THE WAY
THROUGH

Doing laundry means folding it and putting it away, not just washing it.
If you're going to take the time to wash it, take the extra five minutes
to fold it and put it away. A pile of clothes on your floor is still a
pile of clothes, clean or dirty! Decluttering; Staying Organized NO TIME
FOR SHAME

The only way to truly overcome the "messy closet" syndrome is to come
out of the closet! That means accepting that your struggles are not a
character flaw. It's not you; it's your ADHD. This doesn't mean,
however, that you don't have to take responsibility for doing something
about it. In order to take that first step, you must acknowledge it's a
problem and stop blaming yourself. KNOW IT COULD BE EMOTIONAL

Going through old paperwork or clearing out clothes and clutter can be
emotionally toxic, bringing up a host of feelings---shame, old memories,
or horror that you've forgotten something important. Prepare yourself,
and don't allow negative tapes to sidetrack you.

DOES IT HAVE A HOME?

Create "homes" for things like your keys, wallet, glasses, and cell
phone--- anything that you tend to lose track of easily. My husband uses
a small basket in the kitchen as a collection point for these items. A
client keeps a pair of glasses next to her computer, another on the
bathroom vanity, a third pair on the kitchen counter, and a fourth in
her purse. It's worth the expense, she says, to know she'll be able to
read anywhere! USE THE THREE-SECOND RULE

When clearing out piles of papers or clothes, or doing any type of
decluttering, don't hold anything in your hand for more than three
seconds. Make a quick decision: Throw away, take action, or keep.
Cleaning can be overwhelming, so take frequent breaks, but continue the
process until it has been completed. Set a time and day for each "take
action" item, and act on it! For example, if you have a pile of clothing
to donate to your local church, designate Saturday, 9:00 A.M., to
deliver it. STAND UP AND KEEP MOVING

Stand up while decluttering, especially while going through paperwork.
Don't do it sitting down. Standing up helps your brain be more alert and
prevents you from spacing out and/or hyperfocusing on one aspect of the
job. Keep moving! DON'T LOOK BACK

Once you've gone through clothes that you're going to give to Goodwill
or decided on things in the house you're going to give away or throw
out, don't look back. Put everything in boxes or in non-see-through
garbage bags. Get them out of the house or stick them in the trunk of
your car as soon as you can. Otherwise you might be tempted to go back
through everything and keep things that you've already decided to
eliminate. DO A SWAP

Have a friend help you clean, and agree that, in return, you'll help him
or her clear out clutter or go through paperwork. It's a lot easier
having someone with you who can keep you moving and who has no emotional
attachment to your "things."

KEEP IT ALIVE THROUGH ACCOUNTABILITY

The issue for people with ADHD isn't the lack of desire to stay
organized; it's the ability to keep the importance of doing so in the
forefront of their minds. Share your desired goals with someone, and
keep him or her posted on your progress along the way. The power of
verbalizing your intention, as well as having a watchdog of sorts,
should help keep you on course and true to your plan. IT'S A
PROCESS---BE VIGILANT!

Remember that you have ADHD. It takes longer for you to change your old
ways and develop new habits. You have to be committed to staying in for
the long haul to make things stick. Don't give up! Discovering what
systems and strategies work for you will take time. The worst thing you
can do is give up. Know that you will slip and slide, but keep at it. It
takes time to break old habits and develop new ones. CREATE TANGIBLE
ACCOUNTABILITY SYSTEMS FOR YOURSELF

Create time sheets for doing dreaded tasks. For example, if you need to
clean out the pantry, post a piece of paper on the pantry door. On the
paper list the task: "Clean Pantry!" Under that, state the goal for the
amount of time: "Spend One Hour Cleaning Top Shelf!" The time spent can
be spread throughout the day. It does not have to be done all at once.
Every time you go into the kitchen, time yourself and write the time
spent (ten minutes, fifteen minutes, twenty minutes, and so on) cleaning
the pantry. When you reach one hour, stop. This serves two purposes: (1)
to break the project into small, doable pieces; and (2) to allow you to
actually see that you spent one hour's worth of time cleaning. The key
is to make your goal specific so that you can see and feel progress. For
example, when you set out to clean one pantry shelf, you won't be able
to miss the difference in how that shelf looks compared with the other
messy ones you haven't yet touched. Or set out to do one load of
laundry. You'll be able to see that the original pile has become
smaller! CHANGE SETTINGS TO GET MUNDANE TASKS DONE

If you can't do certain kinds of work in one room, try another. I find
that I can't pay my bills anywhere except at my kitchen table. I have
clients who take mundane paperwork and drive to a parking lot and do it
in their car. Do

whatever it takes to find out exactly what helps you focus long enough
to get the task done! OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 11

Strategies for Maintaining Physical Health

For individuals with ADHD, personal health is often a low priority. Lack
of organizational skills and an inability to prioritize make it
difficult to establish, implement, and maintain the necessary structures
and routines to sustain good health habits over time. Things that seem
simple for others--- getting enough sleep, exercising and eating
regularly, eating healthy foods, taking medications on a regular basis,
and keeping up on personal hygiene ---become monumental tasks for those
with ADHD. Because staying healthy has a positive effect on
everyone---especially those with ADHD---it needs to be a goal, and
strategies for achieving and sustaining a healthy lifestyle need to be
incorporated into your life. Exercise DO IT FOR YOUR BRAIN'S SAKE!

Knowing that exercise is good for your body is only half the story.
Growing evidence shows the benefits of exercise to your brain. It's
simply foolhardy not to exercise these days with the amount of stress we
endure, with or without ADHD. Forget about looking good. Make your goal
feeling good! MAKE IT DOABLE

All too often we set ourselves up for failure with goals that are way
out of reach. If your goal is to exercise for one hour a day, seven days
a week, don't expect to fulfill that goal immediately. This "all or
nothing" approach

is a recipe for discouragement and failure. Be realistic and start
slowly. The key is making the goal attainable and being able to do it on
a regular basis. SET A MINIMUM AND A MAXIMUM GOAL

Identify the absolute minimum you would require of yourself---say,
jogging one time per week. Next, identify the most realistic number of
times per week you could jog, a number that you could reach without too
much stress ---say, three times per week. Your exercise goal would then
be jogging once a week, minimum, and three times a week, maximum. You'll
most likely meet your minimal weekly goal or even exceed the maximum
goal. What a great feeling it is to exceed your personal goal! CREATE
ACCOUNTABILITY THROUGH PARTNERSHIPS

If you know that working in partnership works for you and that doing
things on your own doesn't, invest in a personal trainer. If you're
unable to do that, find other means of accountability, like joining a
running group or asking a friend who is a dedicated exerciser to join a
class or gym with you. It's sometimes harder to disappoint others than
it is to disappoint ourselves. BE PREPARED AT ALL TIMES

If you tend to skip exercising because of forgetting your gym bag, keep
an extra one packed with exercise gear in the car and at your office,
one that is always ready to go when you are. A personal favorite of mine
is to sleep in my (clean) exercise clothes. When I wake up, I can't
escape remembering what I was going to do that morning---exercise. I
have my clothes on and I'm ready to go! KEEP A SCORECARD

Because the ADHD brain lives in the present, it's easy to forget past
accomplishments, even if they're only a few days old. To combat this,
make progress measurable by creating ways to track your progress. On the
five days each week that he runs, for example, one of my clients writes
on his calendar in black marker the number of miles he completes. Or you
can use your calendar as a "scorecard." Mark an "E-Y" ("Exercise---Yes")
on the days you exercise and an "E-N" ("Exercise---No") on the days you
don't. The point is to see your progress and monitor whether or not
you're reaching your weekly and monthly goals. Essentially, you're
charting your

own history of successes. The key is to make your tracking system
visible and simple. DON'T MAKE EXCUSES

Consider the time you have to exercise as an appointment with yourself,
and do not break it! When you travel, call ahead and find out the hours
of the hotel gym. Adopt a "no excuses" attitude. If you catch yourself
negotiating with yourself about whether or not to exercise, stop and
simply walk out the door to the gym. Even if you go for ten minutes,
that's a win. CREATE FLEXIBLE STRUCTURES

I use a system of "structured flexibility" when it comes to exercise.
It's simple. I make sure I never miss more than two days in a row
without exercising. I must go on that third day, no matter what. This
guarantees me flexibility as well as exercising a minimum of two to
three times per week without fail. Sleep IDENTIFY MEDICATION-RELATED
SLEEP ISSUES

Some sleep issues may be beyond coaching and have to do with your
medication. If you suspect that your sleep issues have to do with
medication, please contact your doctor. CREATE WIND-UP AND WIND-DOWN
ROUTINES

Waking up on time hinges on going to bed on time and getting a good
night's rest. Set routines to help you "wind up" in the morning and
"wind down" at night. They can consist of anything from showering and
watching the nightly news each night to having coffee and reading the
paper each morning. The idea is to ritualize the routines you have
created around getting up and going to bed. WAKE UP AND GO TO BED AT SET
TIMES

Establishing consistent times for sleeping and waking really works.
Don't keep irregular hours, even on the weekends. Wake up and go to bed
at the same time each day. This will increase the quality of your sleep
by letting

your body enter into a rhythm and help to destress you by knowing when
your day starts and ends. Not everyone requires the same amount of
sleep, but consistency is the key, so establish a routine and stick to
it. KNOW WHAT YOUR TRAPS ARE!

Problems with transitions can contribute to the struggle of going to bed
and waking up. Because people with ADHD struggle with ending one
activity and starting another, it's important for you to know your traps
and be vigilant in avoiding them. If you know that talking on the phone,
watching TV, or checking e-mail keeps you up past your bedtime, post
signs reminding you to stick to your schedule. For example, don't allow
yourself to go on the computer or answer the phone past 9:00 P.M. Ask
for help from those around you so they know not to distract you from
your goal. I had one client who knew he would sit and read for hours in
his home office, losing track of time, so he bought light timers and set
them to turn off all the lights in his office, jolting him into closing
his book and going to bed! SET A BEDTIME ALARM

Use a wristwatch with an alarm or set an alarm clock in your home to go
off one hour before bedtime so you have time to get ready. WAKING UP AND
STAYING UP

Always have a backup system. Use three alarms if necessary! Set one in
the bedroom, one in the bathroom, and one in the kitchen. If you turn
off the one by your bed, you'll still have the other two ringing,
forcing you to get up and turn them off. Or switch off with a friend,
calling each other in the morning, and commit to it. The buddy system
works. Other strategies some of my clients use involve their senses:
presetting their coffeemaker to go off so the aroma can reach them or
purchasing alarm clocks with dawn lights that gradually fill the room
with bright light. Some even sleep with their shades open so the morning
light will wake them up. Nutrition UNDERSTAND THE BASICS

If you are not familiar with basic nutritional guidelines, take the time
to meet with a nutritionist. Knowing the basic principles and food
groups will be helpful when it comes to purchasing food, cooking,
eating, and ordering food when eating out. SCHEDULE IT OR IT WON'T
HAPPEN

To have healthy eating habits, you must purchase groceries on a regular
basis. This means putting grocery shopping in your schedule and sticking
to it. Treat it as an appointment and don't miss it. Create rituals and
routines to help develop a habit of grocery shopping. MAKE GROCERY
SHOPPING EASY: ORGANIZE BY CATEGORY

Most grocery stores are organized in food groups---fruit, vegetables,
meats, cereals, toiletries, and so on. Create your shopping list
accordingly. Organize your refrigerator and cupboards in the same manner
so that you can see at a glance what you're running short on. Create a
preprinted list of your usual items and add to it as needed. MAKE IT A
SOCIAL AFFAIR

Skipping meals defeats the goal of a balanced diet. If you know you tend
to skip meals, make lunch and dinner dates with others you won't want to
disappoint. PLAN IN ADVANCE

Plan meals in advance. Have an idea of what you will be eating for each
meal of the coming week. Having meals planned out will add structure and
predictability to your week. Many clients will spend a day over the
weekend precooking and freezing meals so they can defrost them easily
during the week. CARRY FOOD WITH YOU

I keep nuts, apples, oranges, crackers, and/or other health snacks in
the car at all times. I have nuts at my desk and energy bars in my
purse. This way, I don't get tempted to skip meals or stop and eat fast
foods. The benefit is that my moods and blood sugar remain stable.

Medication

MEDICATIONS FOR ADHD

by John J. Ratey, M.D. The best way to approach the issue of medication
is to realize that some medications in some doses work sometimes in some
patients, but not all of the time. The biggest problem in prescribing
medication that will be effective for treating ADHD is getting the right
dose and drug. With that said, effective medication depends on a good
doctor-patient relationship, with open communication and good
self-reporting from the patient to help home in on and discern the
proper medication and its dose. Generally speaking, the medications used
to treat ADHD work primarily on the dopamine and norepinephrine
neurotransmitters to help regulate the imbalances in the ADHD brain.
Depending on the doctor's experience and preference, as well as on the
symptoms of the patient, the doctor will make his or her best guess at
the appropriate medication. The major classes of medication to treat
ADHD are the stimulants, whose actions are immediate, and the
antidepressantlike drugs, which can take up to two to four weeks to
effect a change in behavior. MAJOR TYPES OF MEDICATIONS FOR ADHD
Stimulants: Methylphenidate-type drugs: Concerta, Ritalin, Ritalin LA,
Ritalin SR, Metadate, Methylphenidate, Daytrana patches Amphetamine-type
drug: Adderall, Adderall XR, Dexedrine, Dexedrine spansules, Vyvanse
Antidepressantlike action: Norpramin, Wellbutrin, Strattera

KNOW WHAT MEDICATION YOU TAKE AND WHY

It's your body! Know what medications you are taking and for what
symptoms. Keeping track is the only way you'll know if they are working
or not. Create a medication log targeting behaviors you want to change.
Keep in close contact with your doctor regarding side effects.
MEDICATION NAME:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

DOSE AMT:\_

DAY 1

SYMPTOM

DAY 2

DAY 3

DAY 4

DAY 5

DAY 6

DAY 7

SIDE EFFECTS

RATING RATING RATING RATING RATING RATING RATING 1--3 1--3 1--3 1--3
1--3 1--3 1--3

Lack of Focus

Restlessness Impulsiveness Anger Distractibility Procrastination Rating
Scale: 1 = not improved; 2 = improved; 3 = significantly improved

WATCH OUT FOR MEDICINAL SIDE EFFECTS

Many of the medications taken to treat ADHD can take away your appetite,
so know the side effects of any medication you are taking. It's best to
eat a little even if you're not hungry at normal mealtimes instead of
skipping meals and bingeing when your medication wears off. KEEP UP ON
REFILLS

When you get prescriptions, mark on your calendar when the next refill
is due, then work backward to the week the prescription is due. Set a
daily reminder for every day of that week so you won't let refills
lapse. TAKE MEDICATION ON SCHEDULE

Do you tend to forget to take your meds? If so, don't fool around. Get a
reminder system in place and use it. Use your environment! Do what it
takes! Some of my clients use gadgets such as alarms to remind them,
while others post notes on their bathroom mirror. One client
rubber-bands his

medication bottle to his toothpaste tube! Other clients keep their meds
at their bedside with a bottle of water. The idea is to be aware of your
tendency to forget and nip it in the bud with a creative strategy that
works for you. TAKE IT WITH YOU

Many of my clients keep small pill bottles containing their medications
in their purse, car, desk, and kitchen cabinet. This way, they have
their medication accessible to them when it's time to take a dose, so
they're less likely to skip doses. OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 12

Strategies for Maintaining Spiritual and Mental Wellness

Maintaining a healthy mental or spiritual life is contingent upon
balancing work with play, taking time for yourself, and giving back to
the community. Failure to adhere to personal boundaries, to keep
emotions and negative tapes in check, and to curb impulsivity can
contribute to diminished spiritual and mental wellness. When you give
support to your internal life, your external life will also be better.
End the Shame and Blame! The only way to stop blaming yourself for your
ADHD is to learn as much as you can about it. If you can understand the
neurobiological roots of ADHD, you will be better able to separate
yourself from the disability and do something about it. The way to end
the shame and start to build selfesteem and move forward is to make
friends with your brain and develop strategies to bridge gaps in
performance. Make a Date with Yourself Block out "sacred time" weekly to
rejuvenate. Don't allow anything to creep into this space. For example,
if you've decided to use this time to read and relax, don't allow
yourself to clean your house instead because you have a day off. To help
put boundaries around this sacred space, make a list

of what is permitted in that space and time and what is not. Post it!
Review it, and practice sticking to it! Hold Yourself Back! Learn to Say
"No"! Learn to say "no." The word yes flies out of our mouths way too
often, and we end up overcommitting and stretching ourselves way too
thin. Each day, say "no" to something, no matter how big or small, so
you get comfortable saying it. Create a variety of dialogues that will
help you hold yourself back from various situations. For instance, if
your friend or colleague asks you to make plans for the upcoming
weekend, say, "I'd like to give this some more thought before I commit.
Can you check back with me tomorrow?" When You Say "Yes," You Also Mean
"No" Often, we don't think of the consequences of saying "yes." Stop and
think before committing. When you say "yes" to something, what are you
saying "no" to? For example, if you say "yes" to doing an extra project
at work or helping a friend move on a Saturday, are you saying "no" to
spending more time with your family or to taking time to exercise? What
are you saying "yes" to in your life? What are you saying "no" to? What
is it costing you? Try to ensure that "yes" adds something to your life.
Keep Perspective---Be Comfortable in the Gray Zone In times of crisis or
stress, your sense of clarity can be skewed and the desire to make
things "black or white" can be very compelling. Be sure to be flexible
with yourself and others. Allow yourself time to be in the "gray zone,"
especially if there is a crisis that is out of your control, like a
death or divorce. Recovery can't be forced, so let your emotion run its
course. In time, the fog will lift, and your energy and clarity will
return. Journal Your Emotions If you frequently deal with "runaway
emotions" or "negative tapes," you probably get locked onto thoughts or
issues, unable to let go. By keeping a

problem-solving log, you can defuse emotions by distinguishing what they
are and what they are associated with. Write in the log whenever your
emotions are preventing you from moving forward. The log can lead you
through a series of questions that you ask yourself, such as, "What
specific situation triggered my sadness?" "What specific action did I
take in the situation?" "What could I have done differently?" "What
specific action can I take now?" Answering questions like these can help
you step back, see the issue in perspective, and recognize that you have
the power to deal with it. This helps you let go of the feelings you are
overwhelmed by, gain a new perspective, and move on. Plan in Advance for
Potential Emotional Upheavals To help prevent or minimize emotional
upheavals, make detailed plans for any times you find potentially
volatile, such as holidays or unstructured time. Write out or go over
dialogues in your head of what you will say in particular situations and
how you will say it. Have an "escape" plan. For example, I have a client
who gets in her car and goes to sit in a parking lot for a little while
to take a break from the traditional Christmas Day celebration with her
extended family each year. She returns renewed and more able to
participate in the holiday festivities. Create a History and Future for
Yourself Keep a journal of past accomplishments, future goals, and
plans. Review it regularly. Typically, individuals with ADHD live in the
moment, which lends itself to a host of problems: not thinking of
consequences before acting on thoughts; forgetting past accomplishments
as well as past failures; not thinking of the impact of current choices
on a future goal, even a shortterm one. The feeling of being perpetually
trapped in the present can often lead to feelings of emptiness and lack
of direction. Having a list of past accomplishments can help to shift
your focus to the success you've already achieved. It can also encourage
you to believe that you can succeed again and achieve what you set out
to do.

Beware Letdowns After Completing Big Projects or Accomplishments Many of
my clients immediately go into a depression after they complete a large
project. All of a sudden the pressure is off, and nothing seems
"exciting" or relevant. Know this can happen, and put a plan in place to
compensate for the downtime. For example, immediately after I completed
the Boston Marathon, I couldn't escape the sense of "I haven't done
anything with my life; I'm a total loser." To counter this, I put
together a photo album of the marathon and started sharing my recent
"win" with everyone so it would stay alive in my mind and help me
remember that I wasn't a "loser." Identifying Your Energy Rhythms People
with ADHD are often unaware of when their bodies are worn down. It's
important to learn not only what types of projects create energy for
you, but also which ones drain energy. That way, you can plan the most
demanding activities during your peak energy times, as well as gauge
when to stop working on a project and rest. Keep a calendar or a log of
your energy rhythms for a period of several weeks. This works best if
the system is simple. For example, use a scale of plus or minus signs to
depict high or low energy times, and write them beside different
activities logged in a daily calendar. Preplan for Bad Brain Days Can't
concentrate? Distracted? My clients call this a "bad brain day." For
these days, it's important not to push yourself too hard and to have a
failsafe plan in mind by knowing what works for you. Take a break and
walk around the block, have a cup of tea, or call a friend. Then get
back to work. One of my clients says he gives himself a "time-out" by
going to a café near work to just "sit and chill" for an hour. The key
is to know when these days hit and take action by doing what works for
you. Practice Relaxation Exercises

ADHD people often live in a state of constant stress. It's important to
learn how to slow down and destress, both mentally and physically, at
any given moment. Learn relaxation techniques and methods to center
yourself at any given moment. Practice slow-breathing techniques or join
a yoga or meditation class. If you are spiritual, make daily prayers a
priority. Take a Daily Inventory Take time each day to reflect on your
life and how you are living it. What do you want to change? What will it
take? What are you willing to give up to get there? How were you of
service today? How can you live a more purposeful life? Asking yourself
these questions at the end of each day will help you focus on the things
you can and cannot change in your life. That way, you can begin to focus
more on the positive instead of the negative. Give Thanks One of my
clients has made a habit of ending each day by writing down one thing
for which she's grateful. She does this right before bed each night as a
way of reflecting on the day she's just lived through and destressing
before sleep. I've tried it, and I agree with her. It's amazing how you
can learn to accentuate the positive! OceanofPDF.com

PART IV

Living or Working with Someone with ADHD

"I wish you could talk to my family," I've heard from many clients. I
have talked to families, many of them. And I've listened, as well, to
the spouses and children of my clients, to their partners or significant
others, to those who are directly affected by the ADHD with which my
clients cope. All of them have a stake in learning how to compensate for
the symptoms that threaten to tear relationships apart, and what I hear
over and over again is that they are willing to try almost anything to
help their loved ones, if only they knew where to begin. "I wish you
could talk to my assistant or boss or coworkers," I've heard from
clients, too. The dynamics at work are different from those of the
family, to be sure, but the investment each partner makes in a
professional relationship is serious and important in its own right. So
I have talked to assistants and coworkers, to many people whose
professional lives are closely entwined with those of my clients. I've
also had the privilege of coaching them as part of the transition period
when my clients leave our formal coaching relationship to put into
practice all they've learned. At my clients' requests, I've taught these
assistants about

adjusting for their bosses' idiosyncrasies and ways of thinking and
listened to survival stories from the trenches of their jobs. By
tailoring strategies for accountability, structure, questioning, and
listening to their unique situations, they've turned their working lives
around. Granted, I have experience and training and expertise in
coaching individuals with ADHD, and I live each day as a woman with
ADHD, so there's much I know and share about the subject. But what I've
learned from all those to whom I've spoken---spouses, partners,
children, assistants ---also deserves to be shared, for they are the
true experts, one might say, in surviving the nitty-gritty details
there, where each story plays out. People and careers that they love are
on the line, and in the necessity of the moment, they are doing what
they must. "It's been such a struggle to get this right, and we really
have to make a commitment every single day," one client's wife told me.
"I'd love to be able to help even one person by talking about what I'm
learning." "You have no idea how important this is," a client's
assistant told me about my intention to include in this book real advice
from real people affected by ADHD symptoms. The families and colleagues
of my clients have demonstrated insight, creativity, humor, and
resilient goodwill in helping their loved ones and/or coworkers cope.
They hope, along with me, that their comments and suggestions will help
you, too. OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 13

Loving Someone with ADHD, or, Did I Sign Up for This?

Brad ran through a litany of his wife's ADHD behavior when I asked him
what living with her was like. "I have to prepare myself every time I
walk in the house," he said immediately. "It's a perpetual soap opera.
Will she be in tears because she hates herself today? Will she be
laughing with a new best friend she just met at the market and dragged
home? Will she even be home? Will there be smoke billowing from the
kitchen from the latest dinner she's burned? Will there even be dinner?"
He often felt worn down by the patience her unpredictability required.
"It's hard not to lose it with her sometimes," he said, "if you know
what I mean." I do know. I've heard variations of his comments so often
that I can almost write the script for them. "I communicate with him
mostly by email," was how the wife of one client put it. "I've given up
on expecting him to sit and have a conversation with me. He just gets up
and walks out of the room. I swear I see his back more than his face!"
Even children weigh in on their parents' ADHD. "I can understand how my
parents got divorced," one teenager told me, "but not how they got
married in the first place. My dad is so normal, but my mom is really
crazy." He was talking about his mother's impulsive, distracted
behavior, the way "she forgets things all the time, like me, even," and
the toll it had taken on the entire family. Fortunately, things don't
have to be intolerable. If you live with an individual with ADHD, you
don't have to "accept being constantly

interrupted," as one husband complained, or "keep your comments short if
you want to be understood," as another spouse remarked. Families can
learn to function, and function happily. Family members, like the ADHD
individuals themselves, can educate themselves and create strategies for
coping. In many ways, it comes down to understanding and to
expectations. "We used to fight a lot when I didn't think she was paying
attention to what I was saying or when she went off in a million
directions and forgot completely about the point of what we were
discussing," I heard recently from a client's husband. "Now we've been
communicating by instant message. It forces us both to focus and zero in
on the issue we have to address. That way, she doesn't get so
distracted. I wish I had thought of it a long time ago, it's made things
so much easier." Even though they can appear self-absorbed and can
definitely be exasperating to others, I have yet to meet an individual
with ADHD who wants it that way. "It's not like I'm trying to drive
everyone crazy," I heard not too long ago. "Do they think I want to look
stupid, like I can't retain information or understand what people are
saying? Does anybody really think I don't want to be loved---or loving?"
The clients with whom I've worked don't want to use their ADHD as an
excuse for inexcusable behavior, either. What they want is a way to work
through the problems that their ADHD causes. "I'm sick of sounding so
apologetic for everything about myself," a client told me. "It really
makes me cry, too. There is a really serious issue with us that we are
somehow bad and wrong and this is not to be tolerated or endured." What
my clients want is for family members to be there with them, everyone
helping in whatever way possible to make the family unit strong. "My
wife is totally supportive as much as she can be, and forgiving," said
one client who, with his wife's help and commitment, had created a way
to move forward after his diagnosis. "I don't play the ADHD card very
often, like 'Honey don't expect this of me or that of me because this is
my excuse.' You can't really get away with that anyway, which is good
because you shouldn't." But just as families of those with physical
diseases or addictions need advice and support from others in similar
circumstances, those living with partners with ADHD also need to know
how others cope. It helps a woman

to hear that she's not the only one living with a man who hyperfocuses
at work but is too distracted elsewhere to buy a birthday card or show
up on time for a dinner party. It helps a husband to know what other men
do when their wives don't seem able to get organized or remember where
they've promised to be. Helpful Advice from Real Spouses and Partners
"People with ADHD always say that unless you have it yourself you can
never really know what living with it is like," a client's wife told me.
"Well," she went on, "the same thing is true for people who live with
the people with ADHD. Believe me, somebody should ask us about that. We
could help!" Her comment underscored for me that it's one thing for me
as the professional to offer advice to families about living with
someone with ADHD, but it's quite another when suggestions come from
those families themselves. "All I can say is that for me, I tend to
gather all the information and then try to make a clear decision about a
path and tackle problems from every angle," one partner offered about
the importance of learning about ADHD. "To that end, I am constantly
pushing for diet changes and exercise and looking at a holistic route
for helping my partner deal with his ADHD. I keep stressing the need for
keeping to his medication schedule, because I can definitely see how
important that is. He has a hard time seeing how all of these pieces fit
together, but as long as I do, I find the strength to keep on trying to
help, as long as he is receptive." A client's wife brought up yet again
the analogy of an additional child for whom she had to care. "I've told
my husband before, it's like having another child. It's another person
to manage and schedule because he frequently can't do it himself." And
it can also be scary. "When I see how much he is unable to deal with or
manage at home," she said, "I wonder how he does it at work. I remember
when he was first diagnosed---it was nice to have a label on what was a
really tough time for us as a couple without even realizing the cause
---I started to see a counselor to help me with the overload I was
feeling. She said how it is really tough having a spouse in this
situation because

unlike a child, you can't just let them fail and learn from mistakes
since those mistakes have major ramifications for the whole family. I
think about that every time I'm trying to help him gain clarity in a
situation, how I wish I didn't have to do that, but it is so necessary."
Knowledge and persistence, then, are crucial for spouses and significant
others, as is flexibility. "I guess you have to throw out the idea of
traditional roles," one husband said. "You have to accept the fact that
you haven't married your mother, who stayed home and cleaned the house
and baked pie and greeted your father at the door at six o'clock with a
cocktail and a kiss. Your wife is just not that person, so please don't
think she should be!" Considering the lifestyle that so many of us
experience, he could have been talking about almost any
twenty-first-century woman, but this man made a good point about being
married to someone with ADHD. You do need to change your expectations
regarding traditional roles. There's more than a good chance that your
wife won't be a good organizer, a perfect meal planner and shopper, a
neat and tidy housekeeper, and a teacher/preacher/playmate to your
children all at once. She's probably good at a lot of other things,
though, so appreciate that and encourage her to develop her talents and
interests. As one man said about his ADHD wife, "You have to love who
she is, not who you expected her to be!" The same holds true for women
living with men with ADHD. "My father did everything around the house,"
one woman told me, "but my husband never gets around to repairs and
things, so it's easier to hire somebody. Believe me, it saves a lot of
hassles and arguing, so whatever it costs is worth it!" But she had to
accept that about her husband and alter her expectations of the "man's"
responsibilities. A few couples have swapped traditional gender roles
completely. "Look," I heard from a client's spouse, "I make a lot of
money as a lawyer, and I'm good at my job. What he's good at doesn't pay
a whole lot, but he happens to be a great cook and a great father. He
loves to play, which he does with the twins, all day, every day, and
when they're napping, he prepares dinner! So we're saving all the money
we'd have to pay a live-in, plus we're keeping our privacy, and he's
doing what he's good at and so am I when I go to the office. I hired a
cleaning woman for the housework, and the arrangement works. Everybody's
happy. All the tension we used to have is gone, at least in that area!"

One spouse's remarks really resonated with me. "I've done a lot of
reading about this," he said, "and I know that ADHD doesn't begin only
after you're married. I keep reminding myself that the woman I'm married
to is the same one I fell in love with, the one I chose to spend my life
with. That thought really helps me keep focused on what attracted me to
her in the first place. It makes it easier to deal with the ADHD
problems, and it helps me laugh the way I used to at how much she
delighted me. I'm glad she keeps me on my toes!" A few people ventured
into the area of intimacy, a delicate subject for most. "My wife is so
easily distracted that in the middle of the most intimate moments,
she'll start talking about a phone call she forgot to make or a sale on
furniture at Pottery Barn," someone told me. "It's impossible to
maintain any degree of intimacy then, and it got to the point that I
thought we were in real trouble. But then we literally made rules, like
having specific 'date nights' and 'no talking during sex.' I know that
sounds crazy, but we kept trying to abide by the rules, and for some
reason, it worked for us. Once we felt confident we could actually have
some intimacy, we tried other things. I think it was basically about
communicating what we each needed, which helped us be kinder to each
other, even in the way we spoke to each other. This didn't happen
overnight, mind you, but I want people to know you can get there."
Several partners commented on the tendency of mates with ADHD to become
bored and their constant quests for new thrills. "In a way, I felt like
we were teenagers sneaking around," a woman told me, "and I resented it.
It seemed stupid. But that was something that actually excited him, so I
tried not to see anything wrong with arranging nights at a motel once in
a while, or other things even, to keep our relationship alive and
exciting. I realized I had to work at this, which wasn't always easy
since I was constantly annoyed at him for other things, like the way he
always puts things off or forgets to call when he's going to be late.
But I learned to compartmentalize and be happy about things we could
make better, and intimacy definitely makes other things better, too." So
there you have it: real stories, real challenges, real ways of coping.
With flexibility, creativity, imagination, intimacy, knowledge,
persistence, laughter, and of course love, couples can lead satisfying
and rich lives, even when one of the partners has ADHD. As I heard from
a former client's

spouse, "What marriage or relationship doesn't have issues? ADHD can
exaggerate or exacerbate things, but it doesn't have to spell the end of
things. Commitment is commitment, period, and it's definitely worth the
work!" OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 14

Working for or with Someone with ADHD, or, Right-Brained Exec Needs
Left-Brained Right Hand!

Most of my clients are highly educated professionals, and they're
invested in demanding careers, so the impact of ADHD on their working
lives is a topic I consider and discuss daily. I know their "wish lists"
about how things might be. "If only people in the office didn't assume
that having ADHD means I'm clueless," a partner in a retail company told
me. "They need to accept that I have certain ways of doing things that
might be different from their own but that work for me. They should not
simply try to impose their systems and styles on me, because that
usually won't work at all. If I try to do things their way, I usually
fail and I wind up feeling incompetent, and then things get totally
messed up." She could have been speaking for many of the clients I coach
when she said, "I wish people could just reserve judgment more often and
be curious about the way I do things. Sometimes they really need to
pause and listen and think!" On the other hand, those who work for my
clients also have needs that must be considered, and they've given their
perspectives, too. Avoid Making Assumptions

"I've done a lot of reading about ADHD," an assistant to an executive
with ADHD said. "A long time ago, my nephew was diagnosed, and I tried
to learn as much as I could so I could understand him. When I began
working for my boss, I could see some of the same patterns that my
nephew showed, so I tried to ask questions about how he wanted things
done and what I should do if he changed his mind midstream, things like
that, the kinds of things my nephew needed us to do instead of getting
impatient with him. Gradually, he began to trust me enough to open up
about his ADHD, and we've worked out really specific ways of doing
things to keep him focused." But that assistant also admitted to making
assumptions that didn't hold up. "I would definitely say that just
because you might read about ADHD, it doesn't mean you know everything,"
she said. "You really can't assume anything." She gave the following
example. "My nephew was a reader, so maybe I didn't pay attention if the
literature on ADHD said that people with it might not be readers. I used
to bring my boss a lot of articles when he needed information or send
him to different websites to read it online, but he didn't read the
stuff. I had no idea what was going on. Finally we figured out a system
that would work for us, but the key was communicating. Things changed
only because he actually came right out and told me he won't read
through lots of material. He said he couldn't wade through it all. That
was a real revelation, and I knew we had to come up with some other
plan." She was grateful that her boss had moved past his embarrassment
about a perceived weakness and had told her the truth. "So assume
nothing," she said again. "Find out exactly what you're dealing with!"
Communicate Constantly Other assistants also talked about the need for
constant communication with bosses with ADHD, who are often erratic in
their requests and demands. It had been difficult, one said, to explain
to her boss her own limits with his managing style. He couldn't keep
throwing work at her at the last minute, for example, or keep changing
his instructions for tasks. "Sometimes one task would change fifteen
different times when I was in the middle of trying to complete it," she
told me. "Now I know it was because

he wasn't clear in his goals himself, but even so, it's impossible not
to lose patience with somebody who does that. I guess the key is you
can't take things personally, but I have to say, that's not so easy. I
used to wonder if it was me who was messing up!" Since individuals with
ADHD often have trouble with time management, they can also have
unrealistic expectations of what assistants or colleagues can accomplish
in a given time period. "My boss would tell me he needed something in an
hour that I'd really need at least three hours to do," I heard
frequently. "It took me a while to figure out why my boss kept expecting
me to finish things in half the time they really took," one assistant
said. "In the beginning, I honestly didn't think I'd survive. He's
really bad at doing things on any kind of schedule, so he had no idea
how much time an hour actually is. He'd give me way too much to do, and
then I'd wind up frustrated and angry because I literally couldn't do
the work, and then he'd wind up the same way because the work wasn't
getting done. It was awful!" She saw that she would have to speak up if
she had any hope of remaining with him. "I would say it's important to
meet on a weekly basis," she said, "and to be open and honest about both
of your needs." Be Aware of Your Language One answer to many problems is
effective communication. Individuals with ADHD are usually
hypersensitive to criticism, perhaps because they carry a history of
disappointing others. Negative tapes echo constantly in their heads, and
they hear every encounter as confirmation of past mistakes, which then
triggers the pain those mistakes caused. Trying to hide their
weaknesses, they're more likely to succumb to them when they feel
judged, repeating the cycle they want desperately to escape. On the
other hand, they're usually "pleasers," so they're open to constructive
feedback but shut down in the face of perceived anger. Nonjudgmental
tone and word choice, as well as nonverbal communication and body
language, are crucial in both personal and professional relationships.
"If we were going to make it as a team, I had to be truthful," a
client's assistant said, "but I figured out I had to use nonthreatening
language. I

suppose I made faces or something, or rolled my eyes a lot when my
superior would come marching in wanting to know, 'Where's the . . . I
told you to do?' or, 'Who told you to do XYZ this way?' I could see how
he would start to get anxious and angry, like I was criticizing him when
I'd try to tell him that he did, he was the one who said, 'Do this,
that, and the other thing,' but that now he's saying something different
and changing his instructions." She learned to have him write things
down. "When he changed his mind," she said, "I'd show him his original
goal and plan. Then I'd say something like 'Could you tell me how this
fits in with what you wrote before?' or 'I want to be sure I do exactly
what you're expecting me to do, so can you clarify if this means the
same thing as that?' That way I didn't feel like I was being out of
line, but I also wasn't letting myself be taken advantage of." And her
approach had unintended benefits. "You can actually help develop some
accountability and structure in your superior's interactions with you,"
she said, "if you keep in mind not to criticize, but to ask or suggest.
It's like learning a whole new language, but guess what, it works with
other people, too, like my husband. It's amazing how it stops people
from getting defensive!" She had also learned to state directly what she
saw as the problem. "I realized that it was in both our interests for me
to be up front, so I asked him bluntly if I could do that. I think I
surprised him being blunt like that, but I promised that I wouldn't be
mean or critical, just honest. I told him I wouldn't be super-stressed
about his expectations then, and he could count on me to do exactly what
he wanted. After a while, he actually began to think a little more about
what he would say. It was right there in writing, so he couldn't act
like he didn't say it." Questions, Questions, Questions "You have to
keep your boss focused on priorities," one woman told me, which means
asking lots of questions when he or she tries to put things off. "He
might tell you what his priorities are," she said, "and then when you
sit down to do them, he'll stall and tell you, 'Oh, that's not really
that important, we can wait on it.' So I absolutely have to check and
double-

check with him all the time. I'll say, 'You told me to remind you how
important this is, so is there something you're avoiding? Is there
something I can do to help you initiate the first step on it? What if we
just spend five minutes talking about it right now?' That usually gets
him to tackle whatever it is he's trying to avoid." But it's important,
she said, to be assertive, not aggressive, in your approach. Try to
Create Structure "I need assistants who will take charge but not take
over," one of my clients told me, "and those are two very different
things." Fortunately, there are assistants who know the difference. "My
boss will do anything to avoid structure," said a longtime assistant to
a CEO. "It became one of my primary goals to keep him on track, so I
always keep goals in front of him with visual timelines for all his
projects. But I also keep reminding him verbally. And I never assume
that he knows what's coming up!" She also had to bring order to her
boss's schedule, she said, so he would be realistic in planning. "In the
beginning he'd be telling me to schedule appointments for him with so
many different people, and then when it was time for him to keep the
appointments, he'd have forgotten all about them and be involved with
something else completely," she said. "I was new and I suppose rather
timid, so I'd just try to cover for him with the people he was supposed
to meet and say he had an emergency or something, and not get him upset
by reminding him. Well, that didn't help anybody, because things kept
sliding and a lot of people were getting very impatient and I was on the
verge of a breakdown," she said. "And he seemed oblivious half the
time!" She had been close to resigning, she admitted, or perhaps to
being fired, but she realized she should "fight for this job," as she
put it. "I said to him one day that I really appreciated the opportunity
to work for him, but that I needed to make sure that he followed through
with commitments. I told him that I only wanted to set us both up for
success, which was why I needed to speak out. And he appreciated it, and
then we kept that kind of communication, and of course I kept my job!"

Patience Almost every success story involves patience. "I really need my
assistants not to take my moodiness personally," said an investment
banker with ADHD. "In fact, it's so important that they be really
patient by nature that if they aren't, I'd say they shouldn't work for
me or for anybody with ADHD. Chances are, if I act mad, I really am mad,
but it's at myself for messing up. I have a hard time keeping in my
frustration," he added, "and will most likely start to rant and rave,
even swear. Believe me, it's not pleasant! It just means I feel like
I've screwed up again. I have a history of screwing up, so when I do, I
feel like I'm reliving every mistake I ever made in my life." The best
way for assistants to deal with this, he said, would be to just sit
there quietly or ask him if they should take a short break. "They always
used to think they had to answer me or explain themselves," he said, "so
I had to hammer it into them that it was not them I was screaming at, it
was myself. I think they were afraid to believe that." Characterizing
his behavior further, he said, "Some days I might come in and talk
nonstop and do nothing but want to tell jokes, make everybody laugh, get
them to lighten up. It's all a diversion from work, though, and I know
that." The best advice he could offer those working for someone with
ADHD like him was to "listen to one or two jokes or stories, whatever
we're telling, then say, 'Okay, let's get on track. You said you wanted
to accomplish XYZ today.' We really need our assistants to give us
structure since we don't have it ourselves, so when we go off like that,
you have to jump in. We'll probably hate it and start swearing again, so
be prepared for the fireworks, but we'll thank you later!" Take
Preventive Measures Just as important, another assistant said, was to
try to take preventive measures. "First you have to make sure your boss
will let you," she said. "I suppose that means that first your boss has
to be aware of what he does or doesn't do, and he also has to want to
change his ways. Otherwise you might get fired!"

She had a manager who frequently skipped their weekly meetings. "Decide
in advance how to address the issue," she said. "Say something like
'Remember we agreed that these meetings are necessary. You told me that
I need to remind you about this.' Ask if you should place Post-it notes
on his computer the day of the scheduled meeting or beep him every
fifteen minutes before it's time. If you really want to get his
attention," she added, "do what I did once. I took his car keys so he
couldn't leave the building without seeing me first, and I got my
meeting that way. He about killed me, but he wound up thanking me
later!" Mutual accountability is really important, she added, "so make
sure you establish up front that part of your own responsibility is to
be vigilant in reminding your boss to do what he's supposed to be
doing." Respect Boundaries Most advice about respecting boundaries came
not from assistants, but from those with ADHD themselves, who were quick
to acknowledge their own tendencies. "A lot of us with ADHD have such
low self-esteem that we think we need to make friends out of everybody,"
one of my clients admitted. "But assistants can't let us do that. They
have to keep professional boundaries so they can stay efficient."
Another client put it this way: "I need someone who will take my work
and me seriously and keep me focused. Sometimes I actually sabotage my
own success by trying to charm my assistants into hanging out instead of
working. I need people around me who won't fall for that trap, so it
takes a really strong individual to say to the boss, 'Excuse me, but
let's focus on this task now.' But they need to," she said, repeating a
familiar characterization, "because if we have ADHD, we need somebody
else to keep the focus for us." One client, a communications specialist
with a home-based office, said something similar. "I told the people who
work for me never to let me send them off on errands," he said, "or
never let me tell them there's nothing for them to do today, so why
don't they take a long lunch and come back tomorrow. If they ever left,
I'd do nothing but screw around all day, maybe play computer games,
check out real estate, anything. They should always check in on me to
see if I'm doing my work, and if I tell them not to come

into my office and to leave me alone, it means that I'm overwhelmed and
have too much work to do. It's a warning sign to sit me down and ask me
what I should be doing, or even what I'm avoiding." Like so many other
strategies assistants employ, however, a lot can depend on the ground
rules that have already been established. One client warned, "You better
not do anything too risky unless you and your boss have worked it out
ahead of time. You can't just tell your boss to shape up and get to work
if he didn't tell you that you could!" Survival! Individuals with ADHD
usually have a good handle on the difficulties that working for them
might present. "As a professional with ADHD, I've had over fifteen years
of working with assistants, more of them than I'd like to admit," one
executive said. "But each one has taught me something about myself and
helped me to understand how to work with the next one, to the point
where I almost have it down to a science---so much so that I've created
a 'How to Work with Helen' cheat sheet!" She had interviews preplanned.
"When I hire someone," she explained, "I sit down with them and say,
'This is the best way for you to serve me.' Then I go through a list of
how to handle a variety of situations. After I do this, I tell the
person up front that if they don't feel comfortable doing some of the
things I've requested, then we're not a right match and there's no point
going further." But if the match is right, the rewards can be well worth
the effort. "Working for someone with ADHD can be fantastic," said an
assistant to a college administrator. "Of course, that probably depends
on that person's awareness of the label, and his interest and success in
self-management. But working for Dr. H., I had a blast because he pushed
my imagination to come up with practical solutions to complex problems.
He saw connections that were not ordinary in business or life or
education, and it forced me to see connections and find ways to exploit
and harness those connections to create opportunities. I never got
bored, never!" Many people with ADHD are extremely creative, so the
challenge for those who work with or for them is to be creative, too.
"Some days my boss has what she calls 'bad brain days' when she can't
think straight," an

assistant told me. "If I see she's struggling that way, I remind her
that on days like that she needs to take a break, so she'll go to yoga
or go for a run or to the gym while I catch up on filing or other work.
She loves snacks, so sometimes I just pull out the dried fruit or
almonds. I guess it's a 'trust your gut' kind of thing, and food works
great!" There's frustration, to be sure, but there's also hope and fun.
Longevity has its benefits when it comes to creative solutions. "After
you've known your boss long enough---which means after that initial 'How
am I ever going to last here!' shock wears off---you begin to feel more
comfortable being as inventive as your boss actually is." It can be
really fun, she said, coming up with schemes and strategies to keep your
boss in line. "Once I sent her on an errand for me just so I could get
my part of the work done, and she had such a good time picking out a toy
for my nephew that she was totally relaxed when she came back and we got
everything done together that we needed to." As difficult as their jobs
might be, then, those who work for individuals with ADHD have
opportunities for more "out of the box" thinking and actual input than
other superiors might allow. Take advantage of that situation, and let
your imagination loose. Chances are good that your ADHD boss will
appreciate it.

TIPS FROM A BOSS WITH ADHD ON HOW TO WORK WITH ASSISTANTS

• Meet on a weekly basis. • Give permission for them to be vigilant in
reminding you to do things. • Be open and honest about your needs. •
Create accountability. • Let go of details. • Have them continually
remind you of what you should be doing. • Learn not to be ashamed of
what you need. • Be honest with yourself and with your helper. • Give
them permission to call you on the carpet.

TIPS FROM ASSISTANTS ON HOW TO WORK WITH BOSSES WITH ADHD

• Be clear with boundaries. • Don't get caught up in their bad moods or
overly excited moods. • Ask them how they want to be reminded. • If you
ask them X and they say "no," just drop it. Nine times out of ten, it is
just some emotionally irrational response. Give the boss time to think
and then reapproach it. • Stay calm and be honest at all times.

"To work for me, you'll need a sense of humor," said one, referring to
where her disorganized mind sometimes leads her. "Take the work
seriously, but a lot of things that happen here will seem really funny
once we step back from them." Then she added a life lesson for most
situations. "Acknowledge and celebrate your differences," she said. "And
don't be afraid to laugh!" OceanofPDF.com

Final Thoughts

My friend and I are happy to share a number of interests in common, yet
we delight all the while in our differences. She's been an avid reader
all her life, but she never reads any self-help guides---"except for
yours, Nancy!" as she's quick to point out. Neither she nor her husband
has ADHD, but among the strategies she's read in my books and articles,
"I always find things that I can apply to my own life," she says. "We're
all just people first, so disability or not, we can all use tips on how
to manage our lives." She's also a reader and writer of poetry. I'm
neither of those things, but I have read each of the poems she's sent
me, and although I'm not always sure what her poems are saying, I do
hear in each the voice of someone living a life she truly loves. Several
years ago, after returning from her morning run---a passion for both of
us, I might add---she completed a poem she had been working on, called,
appropriately enough, "Love Enough." It was about the passions of her
particular life, but in the context of this book, I choose to believe
that she could have been speaking for all of us when she wrote these
lines: I love that over and over We start over, That we stay in endless
cycle--- I am, I have been, I shall be. My sincere hope is that this
book can become for you a way to start over, to leave behind the cycle
of pain and discouragement your ADHD symptoms have caused, so that you
can take control of your time, your tasks, and your talents.

May coaching, or self-coaching, enable you to begin again, now, a new
habit of living a life you love. May you believe with me that it's
possible. OceanofPDF.com

Afterword by Sam Goldstein, Ph.D. SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH When we are no
longer able to change a situation, we are challenged to change
ourselves. ---VIKTOR FRANKL

I have been evaluating and treating adults with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder since 1980, and over the years, I have been
impressed with the challenges many adults with ADHD have overcome. I've
learned that resiliency comes from developing a "can do" mind-set as
well as from having someone who believes in you. In our book, The Power
of Resilience, Dr. Robert Brooks and I write that taking ownership of
our behavior and becoming resilient requires the recognition that we are
the authors of our lives. We must seek happiness not by asking someone
else to change, but by asking instead what we can do differently.
Assuming personal control and responsibility is a fundamental
underpinning of a resilient mind-set, one that affects all other
features of this mind-set and serves as a catalyst to confront and deal
effectively with problems. Resilient individuals find paths to become
stress-hardy rather than stressed out. They are able to view life
through the eyes of others, communicate effectively, and accept
themselves and others. They are connected and compassionate, and they
deal appropriately with mistakes. They focus on their assets and, most
important, find ways to develop the self-discipline and self-control
necessary to manage life's challenges.

Perhaps more than anything else, The Disorganized Mind resonates with me
because of its framework of resilience. It is a book of life strategies
that, while certainly beneficial for those with ADHD, could easily be
marketed and offered as a guide for resilient living for everyone. At
the time I first met Nancy Ratey, I was about to author, with Ann Teeter
Ellison, an edited volume on the assessment and treatment of adult ADHD.
Our vision for this volume was not only to report the current science,
but also to offer visionaries the opportunity to define their ideas,
hypotheses, and suggestions for the future. Nancy Ratey was one such
visionary, and in the chapter she contributed, she illustrated her
concepts for coaching adults with ADHD. I found her model to be
straightforward, empathetic, comprehensive, and consistent with what we
knew about ADHD, cognitive psychology, and mind-sets. Now Nancy Ratey
has broken new ground and stretched the boundaries of the ADHD coaching
field even further. From my perspective, this is the first
comprehensive, self-help coaching volume for ADHD individuals. By
explaining the foundation and tenets of coaching, and by offering
guidelines to help readers understand when the assistance of others---a
coach, therapist, or physician, for example---is needed, Ms. Ratey has
provided an effective bridge between understanding her model and putting
effective strategies into practice. As baseball legend Gene Mauch said,
"You can't lead anyone further than you have gone yourself." In her
personal journey, Nancy Ratey has been to the moon and back. For adults
with ADHD and those who live with and love them, this book is a
treasured resource. It is a fully fueled shuttle on the launchpad, ready
to help you live the life you want to live. OceanofPDF.com

APPENDIX A

Index of Strategies

Following is a quick guide to locating strategies for the ADHD symptoms
and issues addressed in this book: SYMPTOM or ISSUE

PAGE

Clutter

221

Communication

199

Distractibility

175

Exercise

225

Finances

217

Impulsivity

148

Laundry

219

Medication

233

Nutrition

229

Procrastination

122

Relationships

207

Sleep

228

Social Skills

160

Spiritual and Mental Wellness

235

Time Management

96

Transitions

201

OceanofPDF.com

APPENDIX B

ADHD Resources

ADHD Groups and Associations Attention Deficit Disorder Association
(ADDA) 15000 Commerce Parkway, Suite C Mount Laurel, NJ 08054 Phone:
856-439-9099 Fax: 856-439-0525 www.add.org Attention Deficit Disorder
Resources 223 Tacoma Avenue South, #100 Tacoma, WA 98402 Phone:
253-759-5085 www.addresources.org Children & Adults with ADHD (CHADD)
National Office 8181 Professional Place, Suite 150 Landover, MD 20785
Phone: 301-306-7070 Fax: 301-306-7090 www.chadd.org A.D.D. Warehouse 300
Northwest 70th Avenue, Suite 102 Plantation, FL 33317 Phone:
800-233-9273 Fax: 954-792-8100 www.addwarehouse.org ADD Consults
www.addconsults.com

ADD at About.Com www.add.about.com Attention Deficit Information Network
58 Prince Street Needham, MA 02492 Phone: 781-455-9895 Association of
Higher Education and Disability (AHEAD) P.O. Box 540666 Waltham, MA
02454 Phone: 781-788-0003 Fax: 781-788-0033 www.ahead.org Kitty Petty
Institute 800 San Antonio Road, Suite 8 Palo Alto, CA 94303-4633 Phone:
650-855-9925 Fax: 650-855-9924 www.kpinst.org National Center for Girls
and Women with ADHD 3268 Arcadia Place NW Washington, DC 20015 Phone:
888-238-8588 Fax: 202-966-1561 www.ncgiadd.org

Coaching Associations and Organizations American Coaching Association
P.O. Box 353 Lafayette Hill, PA 19144 Phone: 610-825-8572 Fax:
610-825-4505 www.americoach.org International Coach Federation (Not
Strictly ADHD Related) 2365 Harrodsburg Road, Suite A325 Lexington, KY
40504 Phone: 888-423-3131 (toll-free); 859-219-3580 Fax: 859-226-4411
www.coachfederation.org ADHD Coaches Organization www.adhdcoaches.org

Institute for the Advancement of ADHD Coaching
www.adhdcoachinstitute.org ADD Coach Academy Slingerlands, NY 12159-9302
Phone: 518-482-3458 Fax: 518-482-1221 www.addca.com Optimal Functioning
Institute Phone: 423-524-9549 Fax: 423-524-1239 www.addcoach.com Coach
University, Inc. (Not Strictly ADHD Related) P.O. Box 512 Andover, KS
67002 Phone: 888-857-6410; 920-834-9663 (for callers outside of North
America) Fax: 1-888-857-6410 www.coachu.com The Coaches Training
Institute (Not Strictly ADHD Related) 4000 Civic Center Drive, Suite 500
San Rafael, CA 94903 Phone: 800-691-6008 (toll-free); 415-451-6000 Fax:
415-472-1204 www.thecoaches.com

ADHD Products and Services ADD Audio Library---www.addaudiolibrary.com
ADD Consults---www.addconsults.com ADD Classes---www.addclasses.com ADD
Resources---www.addresources.org ADD Warehouse---www.addwarehouse.org
ADDitude Magazine---www.additudemag.com ADDvance---www.addvance.com
ADDvisor---www.addvisor.com Attention Research Update: Dr. David
Rabiner---www.helpforadd.com My ADD Store---www.myaddstore.com National
Resource Center for ADHD---www.help4adhd.org ADD
Articles---www.samgoldstein.com ADD Research, Journal of Attention
Disorders (www.sage.com/Journal of Attention Disorders)

Online ADHD Support Communities ADD Community
Center---www.addcommunitycenter.org ADD Consults
Chat---www.addconsults.com/digichat ADD Forums---www.addforums.com ADHD
News Forum---www.adhdnews.com/forum

ADHD Blogs and Websites ADHD.com ADD@about.com---www.add.about.com Adult
ADD Strengths---www.adultaddstrengths.com Adult ADD and
Money---www.adultaddandmoney.com ADD Coping
Skills---www.addcopingskills.com ADD Discussion
Forum---www.sarisolden.com Dr. Hallowell's
Blog---www.drhallowellsblog.com Focused
Distractions---www.addconsults.com/blog Living with
ADD---www.livingwithadd.com My ADD/ADHD Blog---www.myaddblog.com Your
ADD News---www.youraddnews.com

ADHD Experts Russell Barkley---www.russellbarkley.org Thomas
Brown---www.drthomasebrown.com Sam Goldstein---www.samgoldstein.com
Edward Hallowell---www.drhallowell.com Thom
Hartmann---www.thomhartmann.com Kate Kelly---www.addcoaching.com Terry
Matlen---www.addconsults.com Michele Novotni---www.michelenovotni.com
Patricia Quinn---www.addvance.com John Ratey---www.johnratey.com Nancy
Ratey---www.nancyratey.com Wendy Richardson---www.addandaddiction.com
Sari Solden---www.sarisolden.com

Job Accommodation and Resource Links Job Accommodation
Network---www.janwvu.edu Job Application and the Americans with
Disabilities Act---www.eeoc.gov

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)---www.eeoc.gov

Book List Adler, Lenard, and Mari Florence. Scattered Minds: Hope and
Help for Adults with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. New York:
Putnam, 2006. Barkley, Russell A. ADHD and the Nature of Self Control.
New York: New Guilford Press, 1997. Brown, Thomas E., ed. Attention
Deficit Disorders and Comorbidities in Children, Adolescents, and
Adults. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press, 2000. Brown, Thomas
E. Attention Deficit Disorder: The Unfocused Mind in Children and
Adults. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006. Conners, Keith and
Juliette Jett. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (in Adults,
Adolescents, and Children). Kansas City, MO: Compact Clinicals, 1999.
Doyle, Brian B. Understanding and Treating Adults with Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing,
2006. Garber, Stephen W., Marianne D. Garber, and Robyn F. Spizman.
Beyond Ritalin: Facts About Medication and Other Strategies for Helping
Children, Adolescents, and Adults with Attention Deficit Disorder. New
York: HarperPerennial, 1996. Goldstein, Sam, and Anne T. Ellison.
Clinicians' Guide to Adult ADHD: Assessments and Intervention. London:
Academic Press, 2002. Hallowell, Edward M., and John J. Ratey. Answers
to Distraction. New York: Bantam Books, 1996. ---------. Driven to
Distraction: Recognizing and Coping with Attention Deficit Disorder from
Childhood Through Adulthood. New York: Pantheon Books, 1994. ---------.
Delivered from Distraction: Getting the Most Out of Life with Attention
Deficit Disorder. New York: Ballantine Books, 2005.

Hartmann, Thom. Thom Hartmann's Complete Guide to ADHD: Help for Your
Family at Home, School and Work. Nevada City, CA: Underwood Books, 2000.
Kelly, Kate and Peggy Ramundo. You Mean I'm Not Lazy, Stupid or Crazy?!:
A Self-Help Book for Adults with Attention Deficit Disorder. New York:
Scribner's, 1995. Kolberg, Judith and Kathleen Nadeau. ADD-Friendly Ways
to Organize Your Life. New York: Brunner-Routledge, 2002. Latham,
Patricia H., Peter Latham, and Nancy A. Ratey. Tales from the Work
Place. Washington, DC: JKL Communications, 1997. Matlen, Terry. Survival
Tips for Women with Attention Deficit Disorder. North Branch, MN:
Specialty Press, 2005. Murphy Kevin and Suzanne LeVert. Out of the Fog:
Treatment Options and Coping Strategies for Adult Attention Deficit
Disorders. New York: Hyperion, 1995. Nadeau, Kathleen and Patricia
Quinn. Understanding Women with ADHD. Bethesda, MD: Advantage Books,
2002. Quinn, Patricia, Nancy A. Ratey, and Theresa Maitland. Coaching
College Students with ADHD: Issues & Answers. Bethesda, MD: Advantage
Books, 2001. Ratey, John J. A User's Guide to the Brain: Perception,
Attention, and the Four Theaters of the Brain. New York: Knopf
Publishing Group, 2001. ---------, and C. Johnson. Shadow Syndromes:
Recognizing and Coping with Hidden Psychological Disorders That Can
Influence Your Behavior and Silently Determine the Course of Your Life.
New York: Pantheon Books, 1997. Solden, Sari. Journeys Through
Adulthood. New York: Walker & Co., 2002. ---------. Women with Attention
Deficit Disorder, 2nd ed., revised. Nevada City, CA: Underwood Books,
2005. Weiss, Lynn. The Attention Deficit Disorder in Adults Workbook.
Lanham, MD: Taylor Trade Publishing Company, 1994.

---------. Attention Deficit Disorder in Adults: A Different Way of
Thinking, 4th ed. Lanham, MD: Taylor Trade Publishing, 2005. Young,
Joel. ADHD Grownup: Evaluation, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Adolescents
and Adults. New York: W. W. Norton, 2006. Magazines ADDitude
Magazine---www.additudemag.com Attention! Magazine---www.chadd.org

OceanofPDF.com

Index

acceptance, A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 52--56. See also acknowledgment
accountability, 9 clutter, 223--24 distractibility strategies, 186
procrastination, 123 time management problems, 106 working the plan,
A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 73 accountants, 218 acknowledgment A-N-S-W-E-R tool,
52--56 distractibility, 171--73 impulsivity, 142--46 procrastination,
113--19 time management problems, 92--94 transitions, 196--97 activity
synchronization, laundry, 220 Adderall, 231 Adderall XR, 231
administrative assistants. See also delegation of tasks professional
relationships distractibility, 182 transitions, 192--93, 195

age level, motivation, 89 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 8
amphetamine-type drugs, 231 A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 49--83. See also
acknowledgment evaluation of plan focus narrowing repetition of plan
self-coaching strategizing working the plan acknowledgment, 52--56
commitment to, 210 distractibility, 170--85 evaluation, 74--80 focus
narrowing, 56--60 function of, 51--52 impulsivity, 142--56 mission
statement, 49--51 procrastination, 113--31 repetition and reinforcement,
80--81, 82 self-coaching, 81--82 self-confidence, 82--83 strategy,
60--70 time management problems, 91--101 transitions, 196--204 use of,
87--88 working the plan, 70--74 antidepressants, 231 appointments, time
management problems, 103--4 assumptions, professional relationships, 252
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). See also
distractibility family life

impulsivity procrastination professional relationships relationship
problems time management awareness of, 8--9 brain function, 18--21, 211
characteristics of, 87--88 coaching for, 9--10 diagnosis of, 8, 33--35,
86--87, 89, 110--13, 211--12 distractibility, 164--66 emotional
response, 235 impulsivity, 141--42 procrastination, 110--13 relationship
problems, 207--9, 241--42 resources for, 269--75 time management, 88, 89
transitions, 194--95 balance, coaching function, 22--23 behaviors,
procrastination, 125--26 blaming, emotional response, 235 bottom-line
strategy, impulsivity, 159 boundaries impulsivity, 147 professional
relationships, 258--59 brain function ADHD, 18--21 distractibility, 171,
184 exercise, 225 impulsivity, 156 medication, 231

procrastination, 116--18, 130 time management problems, 102 transitions,
205 breaks, time management problems, 102--3 Brooks, Robert, 265
budgets, financial responsibilities, 219 calendars. See also notebook(s)
schedules clutter, 223--24 distractibility, 177 emotional response, 238
exercise, 226 financial responsibilities, 219 laundry, 220 medications,
233 procrastination, 124--25 time management problems, 106 character
flaw, ADHD contrasted, 19--21, 235 checking-in strategy, transitions,
201 children. See family life chunking of tasks. See incremental
strategy clarity, emotional response, 237 clutter, home environment,
221--24 coaching experience. See also self-coaching benefits of, 11--14
coaching function and, 18--19 collaboration in, 10 levels of, xii--xiii
self-coaching, xiii--xiv target areas for, 10--11 coaching function,
15--30. See also self-coaching balance, 22--23 brain function, 18--21

client feedback, 29--30 coaching experience and, 18--19 elements of,
25--29 generally, 15--16 model for, 24--25 precepts of, 21 psychotherapy
and, 47 readiness, 23--24 strategies, 17--18 communication
distractibility, 168, 169--70 professional relationships, 253--55
transitions, 199--200, 207--8 competition, procrastination, 123--24
Concerta, 231 daily activities emotional response, 240 procrastination,
134 Daytrana patch, 231 decluttering. See clutter home environment
delegation of tasks. See also administrative assistants financial
responsibilities, 217--18 laundry, 220 dependability ADHD, 88 childhood,
86 impulsivity, 148 depression, emotional response, 238 Dexedrine, 231
Dexedrine spansules, 231

distractibility, 163--89 ADHD, 164--66 A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 170--85
benefits of, 171--72 brain function, 171, 184 problems in, 163--64,
167--70 strategies for, 185--89 downtime, emotional response, 238
dyslexia diagnosis of, 5--6 education, 7--8 employment, 6--7 education,
dyslexia, 7--8 Ellison, Ann Teeter, 266 emotional response, 235--42. See
also family life professional relationships toxic emotions blaming, 235
clarity, 237 coaching benefits, 12 daily activities, 240 downtime, 238
energy rhythm, 239 family life, 243--49 journal, 238 "no," 236
notebook(s), 237 planning, 237--38 relaxation exercises, 239 schedules,
236 thankfulness, 240

time-out strategy, 239 employees. See administrative assistants
professional relationships energy rhythm, emotional response, 239
environmental cues, distractibility, 187--88. See also home environment
etiquette, impulsivity, 147 evaluation of plan A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 74--80
distractibility, 183--84 impulsivity, 154--55 procrastination, 128 time
management problems, 100--101 transitions, 203--4 exercise emotional
response, 239 physical health, 225--27 expectations, transitions,
195--96 family life, 243--49. See also routines ADHD, 243--45 advice
for, 245--49 feedback. See support groups and partners financial
responsibilities, home environment, 217--19 focus narrowing A-N-S-W-E-R
tool, 56--60 coaching elements, 26--27 distractibility, 173--75
impulsivity, 146--47, 185 procrastination, 119--22 time management
problems, 94--96 transitions, 197

Frankl, Viktor, 265 Goldstein, Sam, 265--66 "half in half in half"
formula, time management problems, 103 Hallowell, Ned, xi health. See
emotional response physical health toxic emotions home environment,
217--24 clutter, 221--24 distractibility, 187--88 financial
responsibilities, 217--19 laundry, 219--21 immediate gratification,
procrastination, 126 impulsivity, 139--62 ADHD, 141--42 A-N-S-W-E-R
tool, 142--56 benefits of, 145--46 brain function, 156 defined, 143--44
persistence of, 144--45 problems in, 139--40 strategies for control,
157--59 strategies for social life, 160--62 incremental strategy
distractibility, 179--80 procrastination, 124, 132 time management
problems, 103 intimacy, transitions, 199--203

journal, emotional response, 238. See also notebook(s) schedules
language, professional relationships, 254--55 laundry, home environment,
219--21 listening, transitions, 206 logs. See notebook(s) schedules
marriage. See family life Mauch, Gene, 266 mealtimes, transitions,
209--10 measurement, of time, 104--5 medication ADHD, 111, 231--33 sleep
issues, 228 mental wellness. See emotional response toxic emotions
Metadate, 231 methylphenidate, 231 methylphenidate-type drugs, 231 mind
mapping strategy, distractibility, 181 mission statement, A-N-S-W-E-R
tool, 49--51 models, procrastination, 133 motivation age level, 89
coaching benefits, 12 coaching model, 25 sustaining of, xi--xii music,
distractibility strategies, 186 narrative, emotional response, 238

narrowing of focus. See focus narrowing Norpramin, 231 notebook(s). See
also schedules distractibility, 186--87 emotional response, 237, 238
impulsivity, 149, 154, 157, 161 medications, 232 self-coaching, 35--43
self-diagnosis, 212--15 nutrition, 229--30 organization, clutter,
221--24 over commitments, emotional response, 236 parenting, coaching
function, 21. See also family life partnership, 9, 11. See also support
groups and partners coaching elements, 25--26 self-coaching, 43--44
patience, professional relationships, 257 PDA, self-coaching notebook,
43 personal boundaries impulsivity, 147 professional relationships,
258--59 physical health, 225--33 exercise, 225--27 medication, 231--33
nutrition, 229--30 sleep, 228--29 physical settings, clutter, 224
planning strategy distractibility, 174--75, 177--78 emotional response,
237--38 impulsivity, 151--52, 161

nutrition, 230 time management problems, 97--98, 99, 105--6 transitions,
202, 206 preparation distractibility, 188--89 exercise, 226--27
preventive measures, professional relationships, 258 prioritization
distractibility, 174--75, 176--77, 188 procrastination, 119--20, 134
process coaching elements, 28--29 self-coaching, 44--46 procrastination,
109--37 ADHD, 110--13 A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 113--31 problems in, 109--10
psychological damage of, 114, 136 self-deception in, 115--16 strategies
for, 131--36 stress, 116--18 professional relationships, 251--62. See
also administrative assistants ADHD, 251 assumptions, 252 boundaries,
258--59 communication, 253--55 language, 254--55 patience, 257
preventive measures, 258 questioning, 255 rewards and frustrations in,
259--62 structure, 256

tips for, 261 workplace, distractibility strategies, 185--86
psychological damage, procrastination, 114, 136. See also emotional
response toxic emotions psychotherapy, coaching and, 47 quadrant
strategy, time management problems, 105 questioning, professional
relationships, 255 Ratey, John J., 9, 10, 34, 102, 130, 156, 184, 205,
231 readiness coaching function, 23--24 self-coaching, 46 refills,
medications, 233 rehearsing strategy, impulsivity, 151--52
reinforcement, A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 80--81, 82 relationship problems. See
also family life professional relationships ADHD, 241--42 strategies
for, transitions, 207--9 relaxation exercises, emotional response, 239
reliability. See dependability repetition of plan A-N-S-W-E-R tool,
80--81, 82 distractibility, 185 impulsivity, 155--56 procrastination,
128--31 time management problems, 101 transitions, 204 resilience,
265--66 rewards

distractibility, 189 procrastination, 132--33 Ritalin, 231 Ritalin LA,
231 Ritalin SR, 231 rituals. See routines role changes, transitions,
206--7 role-playing strategy, impulsivity, 153 routines. See also
schedules childhood, 3--5, 85--86 financial responsibilities, 218
laundry, 220 sleep, 228 time management problems, 98--99 time
measurement, 104--5 schedules. See also calendars notebook(s) routines
clutter, 223--24 distractibility, 176, 180--81 emotional response, 236
exercise, 226 financial responsibilities, 219 impulsivity, 148--49, 157
medications, 233 nutrition, 230 procrastination, 124--25, 132, 135, 136
sleep, 228 time management problems, 98--99, 102--5 transitions,
199--200 scorecard, exercise, 227 self-coaching, 31--48. See also
A-N-S-W-E-R tool

coaching experience coaching function distractibility impulsivity
procrastination time management ADHD diagnosis, 33--35 A-N-S-W-E-R tool,
81--82 benefits of, 13, 46--48 coaching experience, xiii--xiv generally,
31--32 notebooks, 35--43 partnership, 43--44 process, 44--46
psychotherapy and, 47 readiness, 46 self-diagnosis, 212--15 structure,
44 self-coaching notebook. See notebook(s) self-confidence, A-N-S-W-E-R
tool, 82--83 self-deception A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 55 procrastination,
115--16, 133--34 self-diagnosis, techniques in, 212--15 self-evaluation,
A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 53--55 self-inhibition technique, procrastination,
121--22 self-observation impulsivity, 159 time management problems,
95--96 side effects, medications, 232, 233 silences, transitions, 208
sleep, 228--29

social life, impulsivity strategies, 160--62 social manners,
impulsivity, 147 social support groups and partners. See support groups
and partners spiritual wellness. See emotional response toxic emotions
stimulants, 231 strategizing A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 60--70 distractibility,
175--81 impulsivity, 148--53 procrastination, 122--26 time management
problems, 96--99 transitions, 198--202 Strattera, 231 stress coaching
benefits, 11--12 procrastination, 116--18, 132--33 structure, 9 coaching
elements, 26--27 exercise, 227 procrastination, 111--12 professional
relationships, 256 self-coaching, 44 time management problems, 90--91
stuttering, 3, 5 support groups and partners. See also partnership
clutter, 222 distractibility, 182, 183 exercise, 226 impulsivity, 150,
158--59, 162 nutrition, 230 procrastination, 123--24, 131, 133, 135

sleep issues, 229 time management problems, 106 Sussman, Susan, xi
thankfulness, emotional response, 240 time management, 89--108. See also
calendars notebook(s) schedules timers ADHD, 89 A-N-S-W-E-R tool,
91--101 problems in, 89--91 strategies for, 101--8 time measurement
distractibility strategies, 186 time management problems, 104--5
time-out strategy emotional response, 239 transitions, 208 timers
distractibility strategies, 186 procrastination, 132 sleep issues, 229
time management problems, 98 timing. See readiness toxic emotions. See
also emotional response clutter, 221 impulsivity, 158--59 transitions,
208 transitions, 191--210 ADHD, 194--95 A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 196--204

brain function, 205 expectations, 195--96 problems of, 191--96 sleep
issues, 228--29 strategies for family problems, 209--10 strategies for
individual problems, 204--7 strategies for relationship problems, 207--9
vacations, transitions, 208--9 visualization distractibility, 177
financial responsibilities, 219 transitions, 204--5 Vyvanse, 231 weekly
goals, time management problems, 106--8 Wellbutrin, 231 wellness. See
emotional response physical health toxic emotions winding-down strategy,
transitions, 201--2, 206 working the plan A-N-S-W-E-R tool, 70--74
distractibility, 181--82 impulsivity, 153--54 procrastination, 126--27
time management problems, 99--100 transitions, 203 workplace,
distractibility strategies, 185--86. See also administrative assistants
professional relationships worksheet, self-coaching notebook, 35--43

OceanofPDF.com

About the Author

NANCY A. RATEY, ED.M., M.C.C., S.C.A.C., is a strategic life coach who
specializes in coaching high-achieving professionals with ADHD. She
earned her master's degree in administration, planning, and social
policy from the Harvard Graduate School of Education and is certified as
a Master Certified Coach by the International Coach Federation and a
Senior Certified Coach for the Institute for the Advancement for ADHD
Coaching. For the past two decades, Ms. Ratey has been actively
coaching, teaching, and writing about her strategic coaching
methodologies. She has coauthored two previous books, has written a
home-study curriculum on ADHD for nurses, and has contributed to
numerous lay and academic texts. Known for her high energy and
directedness, the author has served as president of the National
Attention Deficit Disorder Association and has been on many advisory
boards, including the Professional Advisory Board of Children and Adults
with Attention Deficit Disorder. As one of the founders of the ADHD
coaching field, Nancy Ratey is internationally recognized as one of the
foremost authorities on the topic. Her work has been featured in The New
York Times, Newsday, Wired, and Vogue and on the ABC and CBS networks
and National Public Radio. Nancy Ratey currently practices in Wellesley,
Massachusetts, where she resides with her husband, Dr. John J. Ratey.
For information and resources on ADD coaching, visit the author's Web
site: www.nancyratey.com OceanofPDF.com


