OceanofPDF.com

Begin Reading Table of Contents About the Author Copyright Page

Thank you for buying this St.Â Martin's Press ebook. To receive special
offers, bonus content, and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.

Or visit us online at us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup For email
updates on the author, click here. OceanofPDF.com

The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your
personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available in
any way. Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the
copy of this e-book you are reading infringes on the author's copyright,
please notify the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.
OceanofPDF.com

For Frida and Michael OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION

'Man has no Body distinct from his Soul for that call'd Body is a
portion of Soul discerned by the five Senses, the chief inlets of Soul
in this age.' William Blake, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell

'And God said, "Let there be light", and there was light.' And there was
the sound of running water, the feel of the breeze on Adam's face, the
smell of the flowers, and the taste of the apple in Eve's mouth. Thus
was the world born, and thus are we born into this world, from the
moment our eyes open, dazzled by the light, our nostrils filled with the
scent of our mother, the sweetness of milk on our tongue, the soothing
sound of the maternal voice and the warm, comforting feel of skin on
skin. The universe is brought into sharp reality as we begin to perceive
our surroundings through our senses. And, indeed, we are reborn into
this world with every waking moment, the transition between our dreams
and the cold, hard world played out as we crack open our eyes, the
morning sounds of the hum of traffic or birdsong drawing us down from
our slumber, back to Earth with a bump. Consider any instant in your
life, from the mundanities of your daily grind to those special,
treasured moments -- the smell of the nape of a loved one's neck, or
that of a freshly brewed cup of coffee; the taste of a dish that takes
you straight back to childhood -- a fragmentary, comfortable memory of
happy times; your favourite track suddenly playing on the radio; the
familiar sight of a display board on the train platform, signalling the
delay of your morning train; the feel of your child's hand in your own.
These snapshots of our lives constitute the merging of our external and
internal worlds, the coming together of our memories, emotions,
histories and desires, and our environment. And it is upon our senses --
vision, hearing, taste, smell and touch -- that we rely to perceive the
reality of our

world beyond our own body. These senses are our windows on reality, the
conduits between our internal and external lives. They are how we absorb
the outside world. Without them, we are cut off, isolated, adrift. We
cannot live anything other than a virtual life, within the realms of our
own minds. My earliest memory is orange. Not the fruit, but a lurid,
acid-tinged colour peculiar to, and the quintessence of, the 1970s. I
can see the sky above, but all around me, on every side, is orange. For
many years, I could never quite place this memory of orange. Its origins
remained a mystery, its age unknown. It is some years later, perhaps in
my teens, that I come across a photo in a family album; vintage tones
and curled at the edges. My mother, her hair tightly curled, stands in
the centre of a square in the small village in West Germany of my early
childhood. Next to her, a pram; a small infant, me, inside it. The pram
has the sheen of plastic, a vinyl that must have been the height of
modernity in the mid-'70s. And the colour of the pram is orange, the
precise shade in my mind's eye. All of a sudden, I understand. The
blurry vision of the past: me, sitting in the pram, looking up, the hood
of orange fabric framing the square of clouds and sky. But another
explanation occurs to me. Perhaps I have seen this photo before, in the
months or years after my family came to England, looking through the
scanty souvenirs of our past life in another country. And perhaps I have
seen this pram, this colour, many times before. Maybe this memory that I
have -- that I have always held to be the earliest conscious remnant of
my life -- is not real. Maybe it is a false memory that I have created,
a fictional portrayal of my past, a betrayal by my mind. We are all
familiar with the concept of inaccurate or incomplete memory, aware that
our recollection of events may fade or degrade with time. We may
misremember or forget entirely. We may even create memories from
nowhere. The shortcomings of our brains are readily apparent. But
perhaps there is another possibility. It is not just the memories of our
experiences that are vulnerable to the vagaries of the functioning of
our brains. It is the experiences themselves. The sights, sounds,
smells, tastes and feel of the world around us are solid, crisp,
distinct and real. We do not doubt them; 'Seeing is believing.'

The act of sensing something for ourselves cements it in reality -- no
longer a story told or heard, experienced second-hand, but a fixed
representation of the real world around us, as solid as the floor
beneath our feet, and sharp as the knife blade that cuts our finger, as
bright as the sun blinding us with its light. Our sensations are our
portal into the physical world that envelops us, moulds and shapes us.
Through the act of sensation, doubt is cast aside, our faith in what we
see or hear more absolute than a devout person's belief in God. In
Aristotle's view, the five senses are the basis of all knowledge,
through which we observe the 'essence' of the world; through our senses,
the material world interacts with our psyche. Our inner world, our mind,
is like soft wax imprinted with our sensory experiences. Yet perhaps we
should be more agnostic, less fervent in our trust of our senses, more
questioning of our eyes, ears, skin, tongue and nose. We imagine that
these organs that convey our senses are reliable and precise witnesses
of our external worlds, accurately reporting on the colour of the bunch
of roses we gaze upon, or the pain of pricking our finger on one of the
thorns. But we imagine wrongly. What we believe to be a precise
representation of the world around us is nothing more than an illusion,
layer upon layer of processing of sensory information, and the
interpretation of that information according to our expectations. Like
the shaded shape on a flat piece of paper that we see as a
three-dimensional object, or the feel of an itch without any obvious
cause. What we perceive to be the absolute truth of the world around us
is a complex reconstruction, a virtual reality recreated by the
machinations of our minds and our nervous systems. And, for the most
part, we are totally unaware of these processes; we are shaken by the
moments when the discordance between our perception and reality are
revealed, such as gazing at a drawing by M. C. Escher or squabbling over
whether a dress is white and gold or black and blue. Our sensory
end-organs -- our eyes, ears, skin, tongue and nose -- are merely the
first step in these pathways of perception; what we then experience as,
for example, vision or sound relates only loosely to the beams of light
falling onto our retina or the sound waves vibrating tiny hair cells in
the cochlea of the inner ear. Moving beyond the point at which our
bodies physically interact with the world, the complexities of our
nervous systems come into play, acting like supercomputers,
fundamentally altering what it is we actually feel, taste, smell, see or
hear. The translation of these

basic inputs into experiences with conscious meaning -- the pattern of
light and dark on the retina transformed into the face of a loved one,
or the feel of a cold, damp object in the hand and bubbles gently
fizzing on the tongue experienced as a delicious glass of champagne --
is a process of utmost abstraction, simplification and integration,
invisible and undetected by us. The pathways, from physical environment
to our experience of it, are convoluted and complex, vulnerable to the
nature of the system, friable in the face of disease or dysfunction. In
the pages that follow, I will introduce you to a range of individuals
whose senses have been altered or changed in some way, imbued with a
diminishment or amplification of their perception of a particular aspect
of their world; whose version of reality is shaped by their senses in
unusual and often dramatic ways. For some, their condition has been
present from birth; for others, it was acquired in later life. For many,
their experience is deemed a 'disease' or 'disorder', but there are
other persons who sit within the spectrum of normality for humanity,
despite the almost implausible world they inhabit. For all of them, the
nature of that difference has been transformative, in some cases making
life as we know it unrecognisable. Some of these people are my patients;
some are from other walks of life. They are all extraordinary, not only
because of what they have experienced, but because they have been kind
enough to share their stories. As ever in the world of neurology, it is
through understanding the system when it goes wrong that we gain insight
into normal function. The stories relayed in this book starkly
illustrate the limitations and idiosyncrasies of our senses, for every
single one of us -- their reliance on the structural and functional
integrity of our nervous systems, and, importantly, how the perception
of our world, for all of us, may be rather different from the reality.
Their experiences raise questions about the very nature of reality, and
what it is to be human. OceanofPDF.com

1 THE STUFF OF SUPERHEROES

'Of pain you could wish only one thing: that it should stop. Nothing in
the world was so bad as physical pain.' George Orwell, Nineteen
Eighty-Four 'An ordinary hand -- just lonely for something to touch that
touches back.' Anne Sexton, 'The Touch'

'When one of my teeth fell out as a child, my dad made the mistake of
telling me that, if I put it under my pillow, the tooth fairy would give
me a pound,' Paul, now thirty-four, tells me. 'I immediately thought to
myself, 'Oh, great! Well, I've got many teeth in my head. That's many
pounds!' he chuckles. 'My dad caught me with a pair of pliers, trying to
pull my teeth out.' As I sit at the kitchen table with Paul while his
father, Bob, and his mother, Christine, potter around behind us, the
horrifying stories of Paul's childhood pour out. Paul turns to his
parents and says, 'I remember once asking for snacks or crisps, and you
said I couldn't have them because dinner was coming soon. And I just
stood there, breaking my own fingers because I couldn't get what I
wanted.' He mimes bending back his own fingers, and, in my head, I can
hear them cracking. 'Yeah, I did stupid things. Things that, obviously,
any normal child wouldn't dream of.' And it is obvious, when I listen to
Paul and Bob talk, that Paul was anything but a normal child. Indeed, he
is not a normal adult -- because Paul feels no pain. None at all. He has
never felt it. He has no concept of what pain is. He tells me, 'I have a
hard time showing empathy to someone who is in pain. It is hard
understanding pain when you don't feel it yourself.'

The inability to feel pain is the stuff of superheroes, the deepest wish
of those tortured by it. But Paul's inability to sense pain is
unfortunately not coupled with super-strength, unbreakable bones and
super-healing. I ask Paul to estimate how many times he has broken a
bone. 'It's got to be in the hundreds, from minor fractures to major
breaks. Fingers, ankles, wrists, elbows, knees, thighs, skull -- I don't
think there is a bone I haven't actually broken.' When I had first come
into the house, Paul was already seated at the table. My first
impression was of a young man with fair hair, bespectacled -- ordinary.
If I passed him in the street, I would not give him a second glance. As
we chat, I can see that his hands are a little misshapen, but it is not
until I go to leave, and he stands up, that I see how short he is. He is
perhaps just over five feet tall. 'The only reason I am as short as I am
is because of the damage I did to my knees as a child. I broke the
growth plates in my knees on multiple occasions, which stunted my growth
significantly.' And when he walks towards the door as I leave, I see his
limping gait, his bowed legs, evidence of endless badly healed
fractures. Consider your five senses. Place them in order -- at the top
put the sense you could not survive without, at the bottom the one you
would sacrifice first. A fantasy football league; a ranking of players
you need to win the tournament. For me, vision would definitely be at
the top. Losing my vision, unable to read, to see the faces of friends
and family, to look at a beautiful landscape, would be too much to bear.
Then hearing: not to be able to hear music or speech would be almost as
intolerable. Both these senses allow us to detect the world at a
distance, to know the environment beyond the immediacy of our bodies, to
derive pleasure, detect warning, to engage in societal interaction and
the exchange of ideas and concepts. At the bottom of my list, in line
for relegation, would be smell and taste. Horrible to be without the
rich world of food, or devoid of olfactory pleasure, but my life would
go on. Touch -- well, it wouldn't really compete with vision or hearing,
so it sits in position number three. But take a step back for a moment.
Consider a life without touch: the inability to feel the hug of our
loved ones, the warmth of the sun on our face, the warning of heat as we
approach a fire. However, touch is more than just these sensations. We
rely on our touch to walk properly, to feel the

undulations and irregularities of the floor under our feet, to know
where our bodies are in space, how the position of one hand relates to
the other while tying our shoelaces or eating with a knife and fork, to
pull the right coin out of our pocket when paying a bus fare. Without
touch, even these very simple acts would be impossible. While one
imagines touch to be a lesser sense, perhaps the very opposite is true.
Perhaps touch is so intrinsic to the act of being, so enmeshed in our
existence and our consciousness, that it is almost impossible to imagine
a life without this sense. Our language reflects this to a great extent.
We describe people as 'warm' or 'cold', 'soft' or 'hard', ascribing
character or feelings to physical sensations. We use phrases like 'I am
touched by your kindness', 'She's a pain in the arse', or 'He can be
hot-headed'. The language of life is based much more upon touch than on
hearing or vision. But these are not just linguistic patterns. This
translates to reality. Experiments have shown that, depending on whether
you clutch a hot drink or a cold one in your hands while talking to
someone, you will perceive your conversation partner as 'warmer' or
'colder', and that handling a block of hard wood or a soft piece of
material while interviewing someone will influence your perception of
them respectively. The warmth of resting on our mother's chest, the
association with a feeling of safety and comfort, pervades the rest of
our lives -- an intrinsic aspect of human nature and linguistics. Touch
links us to those around us, the binding effects of a hug, a touch on
the arm, a pat on the back, a caress. Our sense of touch goes far beyond
simple electrical impulses triggered in our skin, but is entwined with
our emotions, memories, sense of self and sense of others. And seeing
the impact of disruption of this sense in many of my patients, I would
now certainly not volunteer to lose touch above other senses. As you
will discover over the course of this book, the absence of sensation can
be devastating. But an absence of pain -- the loudest of our sensations
-- sounds like a blessing, not a curse. Pain screams its way into our
consciousness, blotting out everything else. The blinding sear of
stubbing one's toe, cracking one's head, or cutting your finger, elbows
all other sensations and senses out of the way, demanding immediate
attention and action -- and, as Paul demonstrates, for good reason. Pain
prevents us from injuring ourselves, or at least from making the same
mistake twice. We need pain to help us learn to avoid sharp or hot
objects, to teach us what

in our environment is potentially harmful, and to detect injury or
infection. If we do injure ourselves, pain focuses our attention on
looking after that part of the body, protecting and immobilising it so
that we can repair and heal before we start using it again. These
multiple functions of pain are reflected by its various qualities. One
important aspect is knowing where the pain is coming from, localising
the site of injury or damage. It is crucial to our survival to know that
the agony we are feeling is due to having burned our finger on a hot
pan, or from a thorn in our left big toe. But pain also has an emotional
component -- that gut-wrenching unpleasantness, that fear -- that is a
potent driver of learning to avoid it. Without the emotional baggage
that accompanies that sensation of hurt, we would be less inclined to
learn from our mistakes, to develop strategies to prevent repeat
incidents. The risks would be too great, our lives curtailed, the
survival of our species jeopardised. In fact, our brains are evidence of
the significance of the emotional aspects of pain to our evolution. The
areas of the brain involved in this aspect of our experience of pain are
in the oldest evolutionary parts of our brains, structures that
developed millions of years ago in the evolutionary pathway of animals,
preserved in perpetuity, the signature of the utility of pain. Studies
in animals and humans show that multiple areas of the brain are involved
in the perception of pain. There is not one single spot, no single area
of the brain, where pain is 'felt'. In fact, the underlying brain
mechanisms of pain perception are more like a network rather than a
single pathway. This network reflects our understanding of the different
aspects of pain: the ability to identify where in the body pain is,
termed the 'sensorydiscriminative' component, and the emotional load,
often referred to as the 'affective' component. Separate but
interrelated. Information about where the pain is coming from is relayed
to the area of the brain involved in all aspects of touch -- the sensory
cortex. This strip of brain tissue is the location of the homunculus,
the brain's sensory map of the body. When represented in a diagram or
model, it shows a grossly distorted figure with overblown lips, tongue,
hands and feet, where the density of our sensation receptors is highest
and the requirement to discriminate the precise location of any touch is
most pronounced. Simultaneously, this information about pain is relayed
to even more

evolutionarily ancient areas of the brain -- those responsible for our
emotions and drives; regions of the brain that encode our primitive
needs -- beneficial ones such as hunger, thirst and sexual desire -- and
those that are aversive -- such as fear, danger and, importantly, pain.
And it is here, in the limbic system, the emotional nexus of the brain
that resides in the central depths, that the affective component of pain
is processed. One area of the limbic system in particular, the anterior
cingulate cortex, is implicated in the unpleasantness and fear of pain,
and is a potent driver of the need to avoid pain. Damage to this area of
the brain results in a phenomenon termed 'pain asymbolia', which is the
perception of the precise location, quality and intensity of pain
without the emotional context, leaving individuals indifferent to pain
and slower to withdraw from it, due to the lack of an emotional driver
to avoid it again at all costs. Similarly, destruction of pathways
leading to the area of the brain responsible for our body map can result
in people experiencing the negative emotional impact of pain without
knowing where it is coming from. I remember my own children as toddlers
-- a slip down a few stairs or the sting of a fall an important reminder
to watch their step. A smack from their sister: a lesson in how to
respect their sibling's toys. One of my own earliest memories is from
the age of three or four. I remember a hot, sunny day, typical for
summer in a small village on the fringes of the Black Forest, a few
miles from the Rhine, defining the border with France. I had been
playing with my friends, cycling around, having fun in the playground,
the air filled with excited shrieks of joy. We were like a gang of
street urchins, roaming the streets of the village, uninhibited by adult
supervision. The heat of the sun was waning, and I recall being tired
and hungry, the large, heavy glass door to our block of flats a hurdle
between me and my dinner. As I heaved the door open, it struck a bee,
which promptly flew at me and stung me on the arm. I can still see the
pulsing sac of pain-inducing venom pumping into my skin. Those shrieks
of joy were quickly replaced by my howls of agony -- and I developed a
newfound respect for all things flying and stinging. But for Paul, these
life lessons are entirely alien concepts. As a child there was no clue
for him not to do certain things. If anything, Paul sought

reward through damaging his own body. 'I used to do stupid things like
jumping down a staircase, or jumping off the roof. There was no downside
for me. I didn't feel any pain. All I saw was everyone around me giving
me loads of attention.' He recalls spells in hospital, surrounded by
doctors and nurses, feeling spoilt and fussed over. Perversely, for
Paul, injuring himself was a positive experience. His father, Bob,
recalls one episode when he found his son standing on the flat roof of
the garage. 'I panicked. And the next-door neighbour said, "You see,
Bob, there's your problem. You know that children play to the gallery.
You should say to him, 'If you want to jump, Paul, go ahead and break
both your legs.' It's reverse psychology!" I said, "Let's see. I think
you're right!" So I said, "Paul, if you want to jump and break both your
legs, and spend the next two months in hospital, it's completely up to
you." And straight away, he jumped off the roof and broke both his legs
-- and spent several weeks in hospital. He loved it.' The reason for
Paul's complete inability to feel pain is an extremely rare genetic
condition called congenital insensitivity to pain, or CIP. Since the
moment of his birth, he has never experienced feeling physical hurt --
no headache, toothache, or any other ache. Bob reports that Christine,
Paul's mother, was aware of something odd about Paul right from the
start. He remembers her saying, 'Don't you think it strange that he
never cries?' Bob just assumed that Paul was a happy baby. But one day,
when Paul was about ten months old, he was lying on the floor,
surrounded by cuddly toys, when Bob came in from work. Bob recalls:
'Suddenly Christine jumped, because I was standing on Paul's arm! I
hadn't realised because of all the toys all over the floor.' Despite an
adult standing on him, Paul still didn't cry. Not a peep. By this time,
Christine was convinced that Paul was very different from other babies.
It wasn't until some time after this incident, when Paul developed some
sort of abscess and was taken into hospital, that his condition came to
medical attention. The doctor asked if Paul had been crying in
discomfort, and Bob told him, 'My wife has got the crazy idea that he
doesn't feel pain.' And so began the process of getting Paul diagnosed.
Bob tells me, 'We went to Great Ormond Street Hospital and they put
these electrodes on him. They said, "We'll go up 10 volts at a time. He
will feel pain in some part of the body." They got quite upset because
the veins in his face and arms bulged, but they went up to 300 volts and
couldn't find any

pain reaction in any part of his body. And I remember saying that it
would be nice if he grows up to be a boxer, but of course I didn't
realise the implications of not feeling pain.' I am curious as to
whether Paul's understanding of psychological pain is also affected;
whether the absence of physical pain has somehow hindered the
development of those parts of the nervous system that process emotional
angst. Has he experienced the pain of heartbreak, the ache of loss? But
as far as he can tell, this aspect of his life is the same as everyone
else's. 'I've been told on many occasions, growing up, that emotion and
\[physical\] pain are all linked,' Paul tells me. 'I feel touch, I feel
emotion, I feel all the other senses. I feel them all except for pain.'
I ask him if he understands on a personal level, or a purely
intellectual one, when people talk about the pain of a broken heart or
the pain of sadness; whether the empathy he is unable to feel when he
sees people in physical pain extends to emotional hurt. But Paul is very
clear on this. He has lost several people in his life, family members
who have died. The internal ache, the deep and gnawing sense of loss, is
something that he is sadly very familiar with. And as we discuss life
more broadly, it is obvious that he feels the pain of lost
opportunities, unrequited love, unfulfilled dreams. In Paul, there is a
disconnect between physical and emotional pain. At first glance, this
seems somewhat unfortunate -- if you are unable to feel physical pain,
perhaps it would be better to lose pain altogether. But without the
distress of loss or the fear of it, perhaps there is also no joy from
love, no ache from wanting. Without this emotional depth, what would our
lives be? Like that of a psychopath, unable to form relationships,
incapable of empathising with other people's lives. The ability to feel
this emotional pain implies that the central networks controlling this
aspect of pain sensation are present in Paul, unaffected by his
condition. His problem is more fundamental, simply concerning the
perception of physical pain itself. Injury to his body and the normal
triggers of tissue damage from burning, cutting or inflammation are just
not making their way to the brain itself. The conduction of impulses
throughout the nervous system is dependent on a piece of very specific
molecular machinery called the sodium channel. Sodium channels exist as
molecular pores on the outer membrane of nerve cells -- also known as
neurones -- like the holes of a fine sieve. In contrast to

a sieve, however, for the most part these pores remain closed, and are
triggered to open only under certain conditions. When triggered, the
sodium channel opens, allowing sodium ions and their associated positive
electrical charge to flood into the cell, like water exiting the bathtub
when the plug is pulled. This small shift in electrical charge across
the surface of the nerve cell does not itself result in the transmission
of signals, but it is the nature of the trigger that opens the sodium
channel that is key to this physiological process that is the keystone
of life. The sodium channel has a very particular quality: it detects
small changes in electrical charge, with even a small flow of ions in
its vicinity causing it to open. And so, the opening of one sodium
channel causes the ones next to it to open, thus generating a fall of
dominoes and the rapid spread of this electrical impulse along the
length of the nerve cell. A Mexican wave, each sodium channel like a
spectator waiting for the fan next to them to stand up, conveying a
message from one side of the football stadium to the other -- or, in
this case, from one end of a nerve cell to the other. Sodium channels
exist in a variety of forms, each with subtly different properties and
each residing in different concentrations in various parts of the body.
Some channels, rather than opening in response to changes in electrical
state, are triggered by chemical transmitters, such as those responsible
for muscle contraction. In this case, the electrical impulse travelling
down the nerve cell causes the nerve endings to release a chemical
called acetylcholine. Sodium channels in the muscle fibres sense the
acetylcholine and open up, triggering a wholesale chemical response that
results in movement. However, it is the sodium channels that are
triggered by changes in electrical state that are primarily responsible
for the sending of electrical impulses along our nerves. Some types of
sodium channel are more heavily implicated in the conduction of pain
signals. Paul's condition clearly tells us that one particular sodium
channel is crucial for the conduction of pain. Paul's problem is a
change in a gene called SCN9A, the repository for the genetic
information for a form of sodium channel called Nav1.7. These Nav1.7
channels are particularly concentrated in pain-transmitting pathways,
and any change in their function seems to especially influence the
processing of pain signals. Paul's Nav1.7 channels are entirely
inactivated. The genetic error in Paul doesn't simply produce a Nav1.7
channel that's difficult to

trigger, for instance; the mutation Paul carries is so catastrophic that
no functional channels are produced at all. For Paul's condition to
manifest, however, it is not sufficient to have a single mutation. For
almost all genes, we carry two copies, one inherited from our mother and
the other from our father. So, if we inherit one copy of a gene that
produces no channel at all, the second version of the gene should still
deliver. While Bob and Christine are both carriers of Paul's condition,
they are completely unaffected because they each only carry one abnormal
gene. They were entirely unaware of this, at least until they started a
family. But Paul inherited this abnormal gene from both of them, leaving
him with no functional Nav1.7 channels anywhere in his body. The
machinery fundamental to the transmission of pain impulses is entirely
absent in Paul, leaving him completely devoid of pain. Paul's very
specific loss of molecular function results in a very specific physical
dysfunction, while other molecular machinery is left untouched. I ask
Paul if he can feel the heat of a spicy curry, or the cooling effects of
menthol. While he can feel the heat of chilli, he says it is not
unpleasant -- there is no burn, no pain, no discomfort associated with
it. He recalls being in a restaurant a few years ago with a friend.
'They had really hot chillies in this restaurant, and I dared my friend
to be able to eat one. So he took one bite, and he was sweating and his
mouth was on fire. But I sat there and ate five. I felt the heat in my
mouth, but by no means was it uncomfortable or painful.' A rather unfair
contest, I think to myself. While the temperature sensors in Paul's
skin, including the sensitive skin of the mouth, are working normally,
the associated pain signals have simply vanished -- an important
illustration of how various aspects of sensation are conveyed almost
entirely separately, like parallel train lines carrying different types
of passengers to the same destination. And, even more curiously, Paul
discovered late in life that he has no sense of smell. In addition to
its role in producing pain, the sodium channel he is missing has an
important function for smell -- a very odd combination of such specific
roles. Through further terrible misfortune, Paul is not the only member
of the family affected. He is one of three siblings and, despite
miniscule odds of probability, all of them have been affected. If you
consider the statistics, it seems almost impossible. Each child born to
Bob and Christine has a onein-four chance of inheriting both abnormal
genes, making the probability of

three affected siblings one in sixty-four. And the probability of two
people who carry an abnormal gene then meeting and having a family is
vanishingly small in itself, which is why this condition is as rare as
it is, affecting at most a few handfuls of people in the entire world.
But Christine knew in her heart, even before Paul's younger sisters were
born, that they too would have the condition. The effects of this
disorder have been devastating for the entire family. For Christine and
Bob, it has been awful beyond comprehension. Amanda, their youngest
child, did not survive the absence of pain. At the age of thirteen
months she succumbed to sepsis, unrecognised by doctors, in part due to
the lack of warning signs one would expect to see from a child in pain.
As if this weren't enough, ensuring that their surviving children, Paul
and his sister Vicky, remained alive was almost an impossible task. 'As
parents, we've been frightened every single day of our lives.' As we sit
at the dining table, I notice that in the corner of the room there is a
stone-clad fireplace; it houses a gas fire behind a panel of glass that
seals the flames from the room itself. Paul looks over to it and
chuckles. 'One of our games was to hold our hands up against the glass
when the fire was on. We used to love to hear the sound of the sizzling
of our skin.' Bob shrugs: 'They would be laughing in the living room,
listening to their hands sizzling like bacon in the pan, blisters all
over.' Bob also recalls the two siblings playing a game in the back
garden, hearing them playing on the swings, their laughter filtering
through the patio doors. 'Chris said to me, "Just check on them, will
you?" And I said, "They're okay, Chris, they're just playing!" But when
I went outside to look, Paul and Vicky were completely covered in blood.
Vicky had knocked out all her teeth; Paul had knocked out his teeth.'
Both the children needed stitches to their heads, and had black eyes and
broken noses. The next day, a family outing to a show resulted in
unexpected consequences. The sight of two children, bandaged and
bruised, caused quite a stir. By the time the family got home, the
police were waiting for them. Bob, with some bitterness, remembers being
taken into the dining room by one of the policemen. 'He said, "Do you
think it's clever for a seventeen-stone man to beat up a child?" And I
won't tell you what he called me.' Despite Bob's protestations, he was
threatened with arrest, until the police learned the

medical background. An apology soon followed, as did a collection for
the children from the local police station. Over the years, Bob and
Christine had various interactions with social services, and several
threats to have the children removed. For them, the lack of
understanding of their children's condition has been almost as
distressing as the lack of pain itself. But perhaps this is not
surprising. For almost all of us, pain is intrinsic to the human
experience. We are aware of it from our earliest consciousness, and the
language of pain is interwoven with our lives, telling us what we can
and cannot do, affecting our day-today existence. There are medical
specialties entirely dedicated to its control and elimination. So while
the absence of it is, intellectually, perhaps just about comprehensible,
on an emotional level it is totally beyond our understanding. And its
rarity means that even most healthcare professionals are entirely
unfamiliar with it. Paul describes one episode, a few years ago, when he
woke up in the middle of the night. As he sat up in bed, he felt a
crunch in his leg, a vibration in his bone. 'I went to lift my leg up,
and as I did so the upper part of the leg came away without the bottom
half. The lower leg stayed completely flat on the bed. I could see my
skin stretching.' Paul knew he would have to wait for his flatmate to
come home before calling for an ambulance, as he would not be able to
come to the door to let them in. When an ambulance crew finally arrived
in the morning, Paul announced he had broken his leg. 'I very much doubt
you've broken your leg,' the paramedic replied. 'You'd be in a lot of
pain right now.' Despite Paul's explanation, she refused to believe him.
'I thought, I'm not going to argue with her, so I pulled back the covers
and lifted up my leg. She could see the stretching of the skin, and
turned pale: "Oh my God, you've broken your leg!" I said, "I told you!"'
The lack of understanding of Paul and Vicky's condition has been
tempered by the generosity of strangers. Donations have come in from
around the world by people captivated and horrified by the stories of
children growing up without this most vital sensation; phone calls from
mysterious donors in Saudi Arabia; local charities raising money -- all
to enable Bob and Christine to try to bring up their children as
normally as possible. Even when listening to Paul explain it to me, the
impact of a world without pain is so alien that I still cannot quite
understand it. Paul and his

sister's experience of life is so utterly different, fundamentally so,
from most of humankind's, that I am not surprised by Paul's inability to
empathise with people in pain. 'Like trying to teach a blind man about
colours,' Bob says at one point. Given the rarity of their condition,
for much of their lives the only people who truly understood the brother
and sister's world were each other. But with the advent of the internet,
Paul has found someone else who understands him. Steven, based in
Washington state in the north-west corner of the US, is Paul's 'brother
from another mother'. Steven also has CIP, and Paul chats to him every
week. Their lives are a mirror image of each other. 'What I've
experienced is what he's experienced,' Paul says: a shared perception of
reality as a world without pain. Similar injuries, similar stories from
childhood -- and similar tragedy. Paul has lost one sister, and, as we
chat, Vicky, his other sister, is recovering in hospital, having
undergone an amputation of a leg so damaged, so mangled, by repeated
injury that it was rendered useless. For Steven, it was the suicide of
his older brother, also living with CIP. Repeated fractures of his
vertebrae caused him to develop compression of the spinal cord, slowly
robbing him of the use of his legs. The loss of a previously active
outdoorsy lifestyle -- his favourite activities were hunting and fishing
-- resulted in Steven's brother taking his own life. For Paul and
Steven, identical physical scars and psychological wounds are the
signature of a life without pain. A life without discomfort, ache or
agony is beyond the comprehension of most. However, even for a person
with an intact neurological system, moments of absence of pain, even in
the context of massive injury, can exist. 'There is a common belief that
wounds are inevitably associated with pain, and, further, that the more
extensive the wound, the worse the pain. Observation of freshly wounded
men in the Combat Zone showed this generalization to be misleading,'
began Lieutenant Colonel Henry K. Beecher in the opening of his paper
entitled 'Pain in men wounded in battle', in 1946. Beecher had been an
anaesthetist in the US Army during the Second World War, working in the
field in the Mediterranean Theater of Operations. In his paper he
described his recent experiences of the care of soldiers returning from
the Venafro and Cassino fronts in Italy and from the battlegrounds of
France. Detailing soldiers' descriptions of their pain from

terrible and devastating injuries -- penetrating injuries of the head,
chest or abdomen, compound fractures of their limbs or extensive
soft-tissue injury -- he wrote about 215 patients. What he found was
staggering: despite their bodies being shattered by bullets or ordnance,
less than a quarter of soldiers reported severe pain, and three quarters
of men did not ask for pain relief, even though they knew it was
available. He wrote: This is a puzzling thing and perhaps justifies a
little speculation. It is to be remembered that these data were obtained
entirely from wounded soldiers. A comparison with the results of
civilian accidents would be of interest. While the family automobile in
a crash can cause wounds that mimic many of the lesions of warfare it is
not at all certain that the incidence of pain would be the same in the
two groups. Pain is an experience subject to modification by many
factors: wounds received during strenuous physical exercise, during the
excitement of games, often go unnoticed. The same is true of wounds
received during fighting, during anger. Strong emotion can block pain.
That is a common experience. In this connection it is important to
consider the position of the soldier: his wound suddenly releases him
from an exceedingly dangerous environment, one filled with fatigue,
discomfort, anxiety, fear and real danger of death, and gives him a
ticket to the safety of hospital. His troubles are about over, or he
thinks they are. He overcompensates and becomes euphoric ... On the
other hand, the civilian's accident marks the beginning of disaster for
him. It is impossible to say whether this produces an increased
awareness of his pain, increased suffering; possibly it does. As a
curious footnote, he also comments: A badly injured patient who says he
is having no wound pain will protest as vigorously as a normal
individual at an inept venipuncture \[the act of drawing blood\]. It
seems unlikely that the freedom from pain of these men is to be
explained on the basis of any general decrease in pain sensitivity.

Many of us will ourselves have experienced that the degree of pain is
influenced not just by the nature of the injury, but by other factors
too. The pain of an injury is less noticeable when we are distracted; an
aching joint is more intrusive when we are tired or anxious; the limp
only surfaces after coming off the playing field; the scrape to a knee
or elbow eases with the rubbing of the skin around it. These are based
on our previous experiences and memories of pain, our expectations of
pain to come. Our state of mind influences our experience of pain. At
face value, it's an interesting phenomenon but not too noteworthy. Yet
it tells us a huge amount about our perception of pain; in fact, not
just pain, not even just sensation, but every one of our senses. It
shows us that the act of sensing our environment is not simply the act
of passively absorbing information, not just the flow of impulses from
the external world into the internal. It illustrates that information
also flows in the opposite direction, that the interior has an important
influence on the transmission of data from the outside in. This crucial
aspect of our nervous system is something we will return to several
times over the course of the following pages. It is these neural
pathways that also underlie the placebo response -- the improvement of
pain with a sugar pill. When it comes to analgesia, approximately one
third of the population will experience a significant effect on pain
from a placebo drug. But the placebo response is not simply 'mind over
matter', a psychological effect. If you take people who have had a
response to a placebo and, without their knowledge, give them naloxone,
a drug that reverses the effects of opioids like heroin and morphine,
they will no longer have any benefit from the placebo. This clearly
demonstrates that somehow the placebo is having a chemical effect,
mediated by the body's own naturally produced opioids -- chemicals
similar to morphine -- secreted within the nervous system. Block the
effects of those opioids and you block the effects of the placebo.
Indeed, neuroscientists can even take brain images of the placebo
response. Scans can directly visualise the activation of specific
receptors for opioids in particular parts of the brain -- in that
network of areas known to be involved in a wide array of functions such
as cognition, emotion, motivation and, crucially, pain, and termed by
some as 'the pain matrix'. So, the expectation that pain will be
relieved by a magic pill actually does lessen the experience of pain.
But the inverse is equally true; the

expectation of pain enhances it. I think of the countless times I have
prepared someone for a lumbar puncture, the procedure through which a
couple of tablespoons of spinal fluid are extracted. The patient lies on
their side, facing away from me, curled up in a ball to open the spaces
between the vertebrae of the lower spine. After a little local
anaesthetic, I insert a long but fine spinal needle, finding the fluid
bathing the nerve roots within the spinal canal. But for the more
anxious or needle-phobic patients, the pain starts even before the local
anaesthetic has been injected. The expectation of a needle can sometimes
result in them jolting with pain or letting out a cry as I place the
cold iodine swab on their lower back to sterilise the skin before any
sharp object goes anywhere near them. This can be lessened by long
conversations about the procedure itself, explaining as I go along,
relaxing the person and lowering their anticipation of the intensity of
pain -- but this doesn't always work. Essentially, this is, in contrast
to a placebo, a nocebo response. The nocebo response, too, has been
studied in a scientific context. In one study, sixty healthy individuals
were subjected to pain by applying a tourniquet around their arm and
asking them to exercise the arm starved of blood. This process causes a
build-up of lactate in the muscles, inducing severe muscle pain that
normally becomes totally unbearable after 13--14 minutes. The volunteers
were divided into groups, receiving nothing at all, ketorolac -- a
non-steroidal painkiller similar to, but more potent than, ibuprofen --
or normal saline, or a combination of both. But the groups were told
different things regarding the normal saline. Some were told it was
ketorolac, inducing the expectation of a pain-reducing effect, while
others were told it was a substance that increased pain. The subjects
given nothing at all tolerated the pain test for some 13--14 minutes, as
expected. When participants were given ketorolac, they managed to endure
it for significantly longer, on average 22--25 minutes. But the
expectation of what they were being given also clearly had an influence.
Told that the normal saline they were getting was a painkiller, subjects
managed 16--18 minutes, longer than normal. But those told that the
saline was a drug that heightened pain managed, in some cases, as little
as nine minutes. And further studies have demonstrated changes in
activity in the areas of the brain implicated in the 'pain matrix'
induced by the nocebo response, as they have for the placebo response.

It is obvious, therefore, that when it comes to pain, the positive or
negative expectation of pain influences pain itself. But it is also
clear that this is not purely a 'psychological' phenomenon and that our
anticipation of discomfort directly influences brain activity and
chemistry. Yet how do these changes in the brain itself alter our
perception? Is it purely that the brain has altered its own activity, so
that the areas of the brain that 'feel' pain are inhibited or excited by
these other factors? Is it just the effects of endogenous opioids --
those produced by the body -- or other chemicals like cannabinoids
(other endogenous chemicals similar to the active components of
cannabis) dulling brain activity? In recent years, we have learned that
these soothing effects are not happening just at the top of the nervous
system, but that actually the pain-modulating effects are also exerted,
at least in part, much lower down in our bodies. A series of regions
deep in the brainstem, far away from the brain's outer mantle, the
sensory cortex -- where we 'feel' pain -- are perhaps responsible for
many of the effects of morphine, and the opioid chemicals produced
within the brain itself. One region in particular, the periaqueductal
grey (PAG), located roughly halfway between the cerebral cortex and the
spinal cord, is of fundamental importance to this process. Injecting
morphine into this area, or stimulating it electrically, causes a
powerful painkilling effect. But evidence also points to the underlying
effects on pain being brought about within the spinal cord itself. From
the PAG and associated regions, nerve fibres project down the spinal
cord, modulating pain signals at the point of their entry into the
spinal cord, much lower down. These projections directly influence the
flow of 'nociceptive' (pain sensation) impulses into the central nervous
system, essentially being able to dial up or dial down pain far away
from the brain. Damage these projections and this ability is lost, with
electrical stimulation of the PAG, or morphine trickled into it,
rendered useless. These circuits are fundamental to the human experience
of pain and the response to pain-numbing salves. But it may also be that
these mechanisms of control, from the brain to the spinal cord, are
responsible for many of the chronic pain syndromes that we see in
clinical practice -- conditions like irritable bowel syndrome; pain
resulting from a previous injury, long ago healed; pain -- severe,
unrelenting, life-changing -- persisting long after its original cause
has disappeared, or was never there in the first place; pain caused by
plasticity, changes in the nervous system and its organisation,

causing the amplification of pain or even the interpretation of
non-painful sensory stimuli as pain, much like the patient awaiting
their lumbar puncture, who flinches at the first touch of the iodine
swab. We have known for many years that certain circuitry in the spinal
cord influences the perception of pain. I recall, as early as my first
year of medical school, being taught of the physiological basis of
rubbing a painful knee or scratching around a cut to relieve pain;
learning that, when stimulated, fibres conducting non-painful sensations
dampen down those bundles of nerve fibres conducting pain. This is the
so-called gate-control theory; essentially, stimuli of light-touch,
scratch or temperature shut the gate on the flow of pain impulses,
limiting the number of those signals reaching our brain. But what we
know now is that the brain also directly influences this gate, opening
or closing it depending on expectation, memory, anxiety and a range of
other factors. And what of Beecher's mangled soldiers, surprisingly
untouched by the severe pain normally caused by such horrific injuries?
Experimental studies have shown, in animals at least, that acute intense
stress has an analgesic effect. But this effect is nullified by both
damage to the descending fibres, radiating from the brainstem down to
the spinal cord, and the injection of the opioid-blocking drug naloxone.
So, it seems that the painkilling effect of stress is mediated by
opioids and those descending fibres. (In truth, it is likely that other
systems are also involved, such as endogenous cannabinoids.) It is these
mechanisms that likely underlie Beecher's reports of his soldiers and
their lack of pain, their euphoria even -- as well as accounts of people
continuing to play in a sporting match despite a broken bone or twisted
ankle, the pain only becoming apparent when the excitement has passed.
From an evolutionary perspective, these are lifesaving processes within
the nervous system that enable us to run away or fight even when
injured, but also enable us to experience pain when the peril has gone.
I ask Paul what he would do if offered a cure, a way to feel pain. His
response surprises me. 'A lot of people have said to me, in the past,
that it must be brilliant not to feel pain, not to worry about injuring
yourself because you're not going to feel the pain of it. And my answer
is always that if I could turn back the clock and be normal -- feel pain
-- I would. But if I was given a cure now, I wouldn't necessarily take
it, because, for me,

the damage is done. I don't think I could cope with the damage I have
already sustained.' With every joint and bone in his body riddled with
damage, Paul is already crippled by limitations to his movements and his
walking, but at least the absence of pain makes it more bearable. If
there is any chink of light in the darkness of the family's world
without pain, it is the success story in our understanding of how a
genetic change results in this condition; how a tiny change in a gene
can switch pain off, how fundamental the role is of this sodium channel,
Nav1.7, in the transmission of pain impulses. This knowledge opens the
door to new therapies for those individuals who feel excessive pain. It
is a measure of Paul when he says, 'From my point of view, if I can use
what I have to help people that feel too much pain, I'm all for it. That
is one good thing that can come out of the very negative thing I've
grown up with.' As the end of my visit approaches, Christine sits down
at the table. Throughout our conversation, I have felt her reluctance to
talk, to open up, and have interpreted it as suspicion. But while she
sits there next to me, I can see her emotion, an overwhelming sadness,
as she listens to Paul and Bob. And at one point, after we have been
chatting for an hour, in a soft voice so quiet that I almost miss it,
she whispers, 'I just feel so guilty. I feel so terribly guilty. That I
passed this on to my three children. That it's my fault.' While pain is
the bully boy of touch, undeniable and unignorable, this sense has other
modalities, too. A gentle breeze shifting the hairs on the back or your
neck, the feel of a cold glass of beer in your hand, the vibration of
your mobile phone in your pocket -- less demanding of your attention
than the searing agony of a broken bone or the soreness of a paper cut,
but nevertheless clear perceptions of sensations on your skin. Yet there
are some 'sensations' that do not even enter our awareness, that float
through our bodies constantly but are never recognised -- at least, not
until they are gone, when they are only notable through their absence.
And when these sensations are lost, the consequences are life-changing.
Whenever Rahel comes into my clinic, her size is a barometer, an
indication of the weather outside. On the warmest summer day, she wears
a couple of thick, brightly coloured jumpers. In winter, she is
enveloped by

several layers of woolly clothes, a thick overcoat and huge, oversized
mittens. Her almost black eyes peer out of the space between her purple
ski hat and her high collar. But beneath the voluminous fabric, she is
skin and bone, her cheeks sunken, a fragile sparrow in a rainbow palette
of coverings. It is only when I first see her at home, some six years
after we've first met, that I appreciate quite how little of her there
is. She takes up almost no space in the room, and looks like she would
snap in a gentle breeze. In all these years, it is the first time I've
seen her bare head, normally hidden under a turban or a woolly hat;
braids of grey tightly follow the contours of her head. But as I sit in
her living room, I spot evidence of the woman she was before I met her:
a picture of a young woman in a white wedding dress, gazing directly
into the camera, brimming with happiness; a photo of her with her
husband, another of him in military uniform, a certificate of military
service from a Middle Eastern royal; an Arabic coffee urn, a spider
embedded in plastic, bigger than my hand -- the stuff of nightmares.
Documentation of a life well-travelled, journeys to exotic lands. 'I
came to England when I was thirteen', she tells me. 'My mother was from
Eritrea, my father from Ethiopia. They came here for my education, but
two years later the Trouble started and we couldn't go back.' In 1974,
the Emperor of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie, was overthrown in a coup by the
Marxist-Leninist Derg military junta, and return was impossible. 'I met
Roger at the age of eighteen, and we got married when I was nineteen. We
have been married for forty-one years,' she laughs ruefully, a reminder
of the passage of time. Her marriage took her back abroad over the
years, her husband's service in the British Army moving them all over
the world. Roger walks quietly in and out of the living room, trying not
to disturb us, but even in his few steps I see a regimental bearing, and
there is a clear imprint of a life in the military in his voice. I
recall that when I first met Rahel six years ago, I knew her by a
different name. 'When I first started coming to the hospital, they
called me Rachel,' she explains. This error has only been corrected in
the past year, and I have noted the change on her medical records. She
has finally reclaimed her own name, in the last few months of her life.
I tell her that my grandparents and my mother were also renamed by
bureaucratic clerks, my grandparents dying with names almost entirely
unrelated to those that they

were born to -- testament to lives disrupted by conflict, war and
relocation. Rahel makes a wry upturn of the mouth in recognition. Even
when I first met Rachel/Rahel, she and I knew she was dying. Then in her
mid-fifties, she had been diagnosed with lung cancer, a type known as
small-cell -- malignant and malevolent, a tumour known to spread
quickly, to bone and brain. She has been through chemotherapy and has
been offered radiotherapy to the brain and spinal cord -- a toxic blast
of radiation to the nervous system -- in the hope of killing any
invisible cells that might have already sought refuge there. The cancer
has not fully responded to the poisonous drugs infused into her veins,
and she has declined radiation, feeling weak and exhausted from the
gruelling treatment she has received already and not eager to put
herself through it just as a preventative measure. Her oncologist has
discharged her to palliative care, for the monitoring and treatment of
symptoms as and when they arise. 'They told me I would likely live a
couple of years,' she recounts now. 'And that was eighteen months ago.'
Like a Buddhist monk, she smiles as she says this, as if she has totally
accepted her fate. But the reason that she first arrives in my clinic is
somewhat different. She is unable to walk. Her balance has gone and each
tentative step is a journey into the unknown, uncertain if she will find
her footing or end up in a heap on the floor. I now no longer recall
whether she was in a wheelchair at that first appointment or using a
walking frame, as over the intervening years I have seen her enter my
clinic room in a variety of ways -- with one stick, or two, a rolling
frame or, occasionally, under her own steam, unassisted by any walking
aids at all. As I read through her notes and hear her story, a number of
explanations race through my mind. We tend to consider the act of
walking a simple one, an unconscious act that can be done while talking,
listening, thinking, eating. But this automatic behaviour belies years
of learning, of development of our nervous systems and musculature. We
do not stand on our first day of life and stride across the room. Our
first, tentative steps only happen some twelve months after birth, and
our first few years of life are marred by bumps and scrapes as we toddle
and fall. And the systems required to steady ourselves, to walk with a
confident gait, are countless. We obviously need strong legs and core
muscles, with functioning joints and straight limbs. But it is the
control of these legs that is key. The nervous

system needs to be able to regulate the delivery of power to these
muscles in a highly coordinated way. Those systems running from the
brain's motor cortex all the way to the muscles need to be intact, from
the brain itself down the spinal cord and to the motor neurones -- the
peripheral nerve fibres delivering signals to the muscles themselves. We
also need to be able to coordinate the leg movements. Clearly a baby has
the strength to be able to hold a leg extended to support its own
bodyweight, but without the ability to move both legs at the same time,
walking across the room may as well be walking on the Moon. The brain's
ability to process gravity is also key. If you don't know which way is
up and where you are in space, walking in a straight line is a hopeless
task. We will all have had experience as children of spinning furiously
around on a merry-go-round in the playground, then suddenly stopping to
get off; the sensation of the world spinning, despite your feet being
firmly planted on the ground, results in much hilarity as you are flung
to the floor or weave your way over to the swings. Reasonable vision
also helps; being able to see where you are walking -- undulations in
the ground, the nature of the surface -- all allow for a firm foothold.
As we continue to talk about her symptoms, Rahel tells me that since
this first started, she has also felt some numbness in her hands and
feet. Not a total loss of sensation, more a wooliness of touch. When she
holds objects -- a cup, a door handle -- the certainty of her grip is
not quite there. And when I begin to examine her, there are more clues
as to what might be causing her walking difficulties. I start by looking
for indications of problems with her balance or coordination. For Rahel,
there are multiple possibilities why these might be damaged. Most
pressingly, the possible spread of her cancer to the brainstem may be
causing the signals from her inner ears to be disrupted, confusing her
brain as to whether she is still or spinning. A metastasis in the
cerebellum -- the 'little brain' above the nape of the neck, responsible
for coordinating our movements -- may also cause this. And her
chemotherapy for lung cancer may also have damaged the cerebellum. This
part of the brain is often vulnerable to the effects of chemicals. Think
of a Friday night in any city centre, full of stumbling, slurring
pub-goers, alcohol directly preventing the cerebellum's normal function.
But, assessing Rahel, I find no features of increased pressure in her
head -- a warning of cancer inside her skull -- nor are there clear
signs of

problems with her cerebellum. However, as the examination continues, a
potential explanation is forthcoming. I ask her to hold her hands out in
front of her, fingers outstretched. Almost rock-steady, the fingers
remain firmly still. But then I ask her to close her eyes, and as she
does so her fingers, previously still, begin to wriggle uncontrollably
and her arms begin to drift up and down. When I ask her to stand in the
middle of the room, with me carefully placing myself behind her, she
rocks back and forth a little but remains upright. Once again I ask her
to close her eyes, and immediately she veers back and forth with
violence before collapsing into my arms. When I examine her limbs, apart
from some very mild loss of light-touch, there is little to find --
until I assess her ability to detect movement, that is. With Rahel lying
on the couch, eyes closed, I grip the tips of her fingers and toes,
moving them up and down. But when I ask her to tell me which direction I
have moved her digits, she has absolutely no clue. And as I work my way
up, testing her ankles, wrists, knees and elbows, there is nothing, no
ability to detect movement. Even at the shoulders and hips, she can only
perceive very large movements. This aspect of her sensation, known as
proprioception, has almost entirely vanished. And it is this absence
that is as telling as what is present, like Sherlock Holmes' 'curious
incident of the dog in the night-time'. Without sensation, it is
difficult to move. We think of such functions of our bodies as entirely
separate, independent of each other, but in reality they are intimately
linked. Consider the act of picking up a glass. The muscles of our
shoulder, arm, wrist and hand act in unison to move our limb into the
correct position as we curl our fingers around the glass and lift it to
our lips. But how do we avoid breaking the glass by exerting too much
pressure, or letting it slip from our hand by not grasping it tightly
enough? We of course feel the pressure-sensation on the pulps of our
fingertips and the palms of our hands, and years of practice make us
less clumsy, knowing precisely how hard to hold things. But it is not
only this aspect of sensation that is of vital importance for our
movement. If you hold that glass and close your eyes, you can still lift
it to your lips and take a drink; your body knows where your limbs are
in relation to each other and in relation to your external world,
regardless of whether you can see your body parts. Otherwise, how could
you scratch an itch behind your ear, walk in the dark or touch-type
without looking?

This sensory information is so important that without it we are rendered
almost useless. Entire tracts of nerve fibres, in our peripheral nerves
and spinal cords, are dedicated to it -- sensors all devoted to the
perception of tiny movements or changes in position. Receptors in the
joints or in the skin overlying the joints provide important information
about how flexed or extended each joint is. But perhaps most important
is a small structure known as the muscle spindle receptor, twisted
around specialised muscle fibres. This tiny structure is exquisitely
sensitive to minute changes in muscle length, and provides the
all-important feedback caused by active or passive lengthening or
stretching of muscles depending on body position. In fact, the muscle
spindle receptor is responsible for the most iconic test that we
neurologists routinely do. If there is one thing that patients expect of
me, whether it is necessary or not, it is the wielding of a tendon
hammer and the knee-tapping to check their reflexes. As they walk into
clinic, they see that round, chrome-andrubber head and long, white,
plastic handle on my desk, and I sometimes get the feeling that people
feel short-changed if I do not attack their knees with it during their
visit. What we are actually doing with it is stimulating the muscle
spindle receptors. By tapping a tendon, we very briefly and rapidly
stretch the muscle, stimulating the feeling that the limb is being
passively moved. As a reflex response, the muscles instantly contract a
little to maintain body position, which results in a jerk. In this way,
we test the circuitry underlying this reflex -- the sensory signals
conducting musclestretch information to the spinal cord, and the motor
signals back down to the muscle. But there are other tricks that can be
played. The spindle receptor is also powerfully stimulated by vibration.
Apply vibration to a muscle and this will result in the perception that
the muscle is being stretched. As with the tendon hammer, application of
vibration results in the illusion that your limb is being moved. The
simple act of movement needs constant adjustment, with ongoing
corrections, depending on the reality of the current status of our body.
Take the lifting of that glass of water to your lips. If you do it over
and over, with the glass and your body in the same position, in theory
your muscles will learn to exert the precise series of forces on your
arm to achieve this successfully. But then put on a watch or fill the
glass a few millilitres more, and those same forces may not achieve the
same result in the presence of

tiny differences in mass. In the absence of knowledge of where your arm
is in space, small changes in your world would result in wildly
different outcomes, like splashing the water in your eyes rather than
taking a sip. I have seen cases like Rahel's before. I recall a few
years ago seeing a young man, in his mid-twenties, working in the media.
Rob (not his real name) was a man about town, enjoying the rich social
life that London has to offer; confident, cheeky and surprisingly blasÃ©
about the fact that over the preceding week he had gone from partying
throughout the whole weekend to being unable to walk in a straight line.
Examining him, I found the same features as seen in Rahel, a complete
inability to know where his limbs were in space, to such an extent that
he could barely stand without support. He was otherwise entirely fit and
well, without any obvious cause for his condition. I interrogated him
about any recreational drug use and he denied taking any. When I asked
him if he had been inhaling laughing gas (nitrous oxide), he looked
slightly astonished. After a brief pause, he slightly sheepishly told
me, 'Yes, I've used it a bit.' Irritated by his obtuse response, I
pursued this line of questioning and asked him what 'a bit' meant.
'Well, about thirty balloons on Saturday, and forty on Sunday.' And as
the story unravelled, he admitted to regular and heavy use of nitrous
oxide. As I cycle back home from the hospital, I pass through the
Vauxhall area of London. This neighbourhood is rather unusual, even for
London. At one end, at 85 Albert Embankment, is the hulking MI6
building, scowling over the Thames. Its architect was inspired by Aztec
and Mayan temples, as well as 1930s industrial modernist styles, and
there is also something reminiscent of Nazi-era buildings about it. With
its roof covered in satellite dishes and antennae, it casts a somewhat
dark shadow. At the other end is the new US embassy, another behemoth, a
block-like fortress surrounded by a pseudo-moat. When Donald Trump heard
of the plan to move the US embassy from the genteel environment of
Grosvenor Square, in the heart of Mayfair, to this less salubrious part
of London, he was disgusted. It was going from the most expensive area
on the Monopoly board to one that does not even figure on it. Trump
criticised the move, calling it a 'Bush--Obama special' and describing
the location as 'lousy' and 'horrible' -- for, sandwiched between the
embassy and the MI5 building is Vauxhall Cross, the site of a large
train station. On one corner sits the Vauxhall Tavern, a landmark in
London's gay scene, famed for its drag shows since the 1970s.

From about 7 p.m. onwards, a queue of people in drag and other audience
members snakes around the pub, waiting to enter. In the arches under the
tracks are located a series of clubs, bars and saunas, and from the
hours of dusk, sometimes until nine or ten in the morning, the streets
are awash with inebriated and chemically altered partygoers and
pleasure-seekers. I suspect they are as fond of Trump as he is of them.
Passing through early in the morning, the road under my bicycle tyres
often tinkles as I cycle; scattered across the ground, like the remnants
of a glitter party or a sprinkling of silver snow, are countless small
silver canisters, an inch or two in length, flattened by the passing
traffic. These canisters will each have contained eight grams of nitrous
oxide; they are made for catering companies, where they are used to make
whipped cream. But for the partygoers of Vauxhall their purpose is
somewhat different. It is used to inflate party balloons, which are then
sold and inhaled for a few seconds of a high. Inhalation of nitrous
oxide induces a brief period of euphoria, and occasionally mild
hallucinations. It is also known as 'hippy crack' or, in the US,
'Whip-Its'. But the regular use of nitrous oxide can have some
unintended consequences. In addition to its desired effects on the
brain, nitrous oxide has some chemical effects elsewhere. It essentially
deactivates vitamin B12, a nutrient fundamental to the health of our
nervous system and the generation of red blood cells. Essentially,
regular and heavy nitrous oxide usage makes people profoundly vitamin
B12-deficient. There are other causes of B12 deficiency, most notably
pernicious anaemia, a diagnosis that sounds straight out of the pages of
a Dickens novel. Pernicious anaemia is different from normal anaemia,
and is not due to iron deficiency; rather, it is caused by one's own
immune system attacking the lining of the stomach, preventing the
production of a chemical vital for the absorption of B12. No matter how
much vitamin B12 you consume, it simply does not enter into the
bloodstream, leading to a deficiency of usable B12 -- 'starvation in the
midst of plenty'. This results in severe anaemia unless recognised and
treated while still in its early stages. Pernicious -- meaning harmful,
in a gradual or subtle way -- refers to the slow, unnoticeable
progression of the condition, until the anaemia is so severe that you
are left weak and exhausted, with a racing heart and

shortness of breath. But in this context, pernicious also means deadly,
an inevitable endpoint in the era before effective treatment. And it's
not just anaemia that results from the lack of vitamin B12. There are
neurological complications too. Patients will experience tingling in the
hands and feet, as the nerves transmitting sensory information begin to
malfunction. As the damage progresses, sufferers will gradually develop
weak legs and increasing numbness. But the nature of that numbness is
unusual. While pain and temperature-sensation are usually preserved, it
is light-touch, the sensation of vibration and, in particular, a sense
of jointposition, that are affected. There seems to be a disconnect
between the various sensory modalities, with some sensations entirely
unaffected and others obliterated. The reason for this is not
immediately clear -- that is, until you look closer. Historical
specimens of people dying with this condition exhibit the hallmark of
vitamin B12 deficiency. While the nerves are indeed affected, the spinal
cord is as well. Looking at sections of the spinal cord under the
microscope reveals changes there, but it is the location of these
changes that explains this dissociated sensory loss. Various areas of
the spinal cord show swelling, degeneration and gradual scarring,
particularly in the part of the spinal cord known as the dorsal columns,
the aspect of the spinal cord closest to the skin of the back, and
comprising thick bundles of fibres transmitting impulses encoding
vibration sense and joint-position sense from the periphery to the
brain. In the modern age of medicine, rather than just waiting for
people to die of pernicious anaemia, we can scan them. MRI scans show a
similar abnormality to historical examples, with changes visible in the
dorsal columns -- parallel tramlines of different sensory modalities
existing in the spinal cord. Indeed sometimes a scan is how the
diagnosis of B12 deficiency is made. So while the dorsal columns
transmit certain sensations, others, like temperature and pain, are
conveyed elsewhere, in the spinothalamic tracts, which are in the part
of the spinal cord that sits much closer to our front than our back. In
fact, this organisational detail of our nervous system can generate some
surprising results, and ones that are useful to neurologists, giving us
important clues as to where the problem lies. For instance, most people
will be familiar with the idea that the left side of our brain is
responsible for movement and sensation on the right side of our body;
the right brain

corresponding to our left side -- that somewhere within our nervous
systems there is a crossing-over of signalling from one side to another.
But for different parts of the nervous system the site of the cross-over
varies. When it comes to sensation, the tracts that conduct the sense of
vibration and of joint-position switch sides at the top of the spinal
cord, as it enters the brain. In contrast, the pathways conducting pain
and temperature cross over at the point at which they enter the spinal
cord, much lower down. You would be forgiven for thinking these are
irrelevant details, but they are important if you damage your spinal
cord. If one side of the spinal cord is injured -- by inflammation,
compression or a foreign body like a bullet or a knife wound -- you may
end up with a very strange set of symptoms. Bizarrely, you may
experience the loss of pain- and temperature-sensation in one leg, while
in the other leg you lose sensation of vibration and jointposition --
dissociated sensory loss, affecting both legs but in different ways.
Imagine a knife stabbed through your back, cutting through the whole of
the left side of your spinal cord at the level of your chest. At the
level of the cut, the dorsal columns are carrying information about
light-touch and jointposition from your left leg that is yet to cross
over to the other side. But the spinothalamic tracts have crossed over
below the level of the cut and are conveying signals of pain and
temperature from the right leg. This condition, known as Brown-SÃ©quard
syndrome, is beloved by medical students due to its striking nature and
equally cherished by those of us trying to educate those medical
students. It provides a very concrete example of the highly organised
nature of the nervous system and an important aide-memoire to
neuroanatomy.

Figure 1. Sensory pathways to the brain. These pathways differ,
depending on the sensory modality. Pain and temperature sensation is
conducted by the spinothalamic pathways (dashed line) and crosses over
to the opposite side of the body as soon as these impulses enter the
spinal cord. In contrast, vibration and joint-position
sense/proprioception (dotted line) remain on the same side of the body
in the dorsal columns, until they pass into the brainstem. Ultimately,
all sensory data passes to the primary somatosensory cortex on the
opposite side, but due to these two pathways damage to one side of the
spinal cord can result in differential impairment to the different types
of sensation, as in Brown-SÃ©quard syndrome.

In Rob's case, however, there was no evidence of any impact to his
temperature- or pain sensation. His inability to walk was almost
entirely down to a lack of positional information; a scan showed the
characteristic appearances of vitamin B12 deficiency, known as subacute
combined degeneration of the cord. In fact, even before the scan and the
results of blood tests confirming the lack of B12, I had given him daily
vitamin B12 injections, and over the next few weeks his walking
normalised. I discharged him a few days later, with strict instructions
to use nitrous oxide only for whipping cream. Whether or not he took my
advice, I will never know. After turning up in my clinic a couple of
times, he subsequently disappeared into the sprawling mass of the city,
nonchalant and seemingly without embarrassment, never attending any
further appointments.

Rahel, of course, is entirely unfamiliar with the little silver
canisters of laughing gas scattering the streets of Vauxhall. But it is
clear that something similar is going on within her nervous system. The
ability to detect movements in her limbs, to sense, either consciously
or unconsciously, the relationship between the positions of her toes,
feet, knees and hips -- so crucial to the act of standing or walking --
has been cryptically and critically impaired. She is left barely able to
stand without assistance, and taking a couple of steps is almost beyond
her abilities. But ultimately, the dark shadow, some 2cm in diameter, in
the apex of her left lung, of small-cell cancer, looms over her, and
over my diagnostic thinking. Over the next couple of weeks, I subject
Rahel to a battery of tests -- blood examinations, scans, a lumbar
puncture to examine her spinal fluid, electrical tests of her nerves.
These nerve conduction studies show that there is an absence of sensory
transmission through the nerves of her arms, and to some degree her legs
too. The MRI scan shows no obvious spread of the cancer to her brain or
spinal cord. But, like Rob and his nitrous-oxideinduced imbalance, when
I look at the black-and-white images on my computer screen, there are
changes apparent in the spinal cord, from the top of the neck to the
middle of her chest level, tracking along the dorsal columns -- the
tracts mediating vibration and joint-position sense. Something has
damaged her spinal cord as well as her nerves. But for Rahel, vitamin
B12 is not the culprit -- all her blood tests are normal and there is no
evidence of inflammation or infection in her spinal fluid. A few days
after the tests have been completed, I see Rahel again in my clinic. She
is pushed into the room on a wheelchair by a supportive friend. She
smiles in greeting but she looks fragile and weak, still swathed in
layers of wool and cotton -- cardigan over jumper over sweatshirt over
shirt. I have already spoken to her oncologist to learn what her
prognosis is. She is for palliative care only. She has perhaps a few
months, a year, maybe even two at a stretch. As we chat, it is obvious
that if anything she has got worse, now unable to stand at all. We
discuss her results, and while I think I know what might be happening, I
have no definitive evidence. So, to delay the moment when I need to
admit I am not sure, I go through the results one by one. I list the
normal results, and to each pronouncement she nods silently. I then go
on to describe the electrical study report, and the findings from the
scans. I tell

her there is no evidence of spread of the cancer, to which she briefly
smiles. I pause for a moment, before going on, as I know that what I say
next is somewhat speculative, based on the overall clinical picture
rather than any specific results. Despite no evidence of the cancer
progressing, I tell Rahel that I think the cancer is indeed to blame,
albeit in a somewhat unexpected way. Cancer causes damage not just
through invasion, through infiltration of normal tissue, through
disrupting function; in some cases, cancer is the orchestrator of other
modes of attack. Certain types of cancer, and particularly small-cell
lung cancer, can trick the body into damaging itself. While cancerous
cells come from our own body, and are therefore difficult for our immune
systems to recognise as foreign invaders, sometimes the immune system
does identify the abnormal cells as such, and this generates an immune
response, an effort to rid the body of the disease creeping through our
tissues and bloodstream. But certain aspects of the cancerous cells can
look very similar to other cells in our body, causing the immune
response to also target these bystanders in the battle between the
cancer and our own mechanisms of protection. This results in damage
triggered by the cancer but carried out by our own body -- a sort of
cellular suicide. And as I tell Rahel all this, her eyes are fixed on my
face, listening intently. Despite the failure to identify a specific
antibody in her that is associated with this type of syndrome, I say
that, nonetheless, this is what I think she has: an immune attack on her
spinal cord and peripheral nerves, triggered by her cancer, causing this
failure to conduct impulses for jointposition sense -- proprioception --
from her limbs to her brain. In normal circumstances, the treatment
would be to rid the body of the cancer, but this has been tried to no
avail. The only other option is to suppress her immune system, to dampen
down the damage her own body is doing to itself. Theoretically, however,
her immune system may actually be helping keep her cancer in check, and
slowing it down may risk accelerating the growth of her tumour. I must
have painted a rather bleak picture, and I recall proposing this
treatment option couched in somewhat pessimistic terms. At one point, a
few years later, she tells me, 'I remember that when you suggested
trying something, I said, "We've got nothing else to lose. Please,
anything that I can have to help me would be very nice."'

We agree to try a specific treatment called immunoglobulin. In this
treatment, a preparation of antibodies collected from thousands of
normal individuals is infused directly into a vein every few weeks. The
precise mechanism of this action is uncertain, but flooding the system
with normal antibodies seems to dilute the unwanted immune response
driving this condition. And so, with low expectations, on my part at
least, we agree to go down this road. I see Rahel four weeks after the
infusion, and I am somewhat taken aback to see her walk into the clinic
room unassisted, a look of pride on her face as she clutches a walking
stick in one hand. She is effervescent, glowing with a sense of
achievement. She tells me that she has gone from being virtually unable
to stand, to walking for thirty minutes at a time, even braving a walk
to the local shops. Her garden, neglected for the past few months, has
now regained its order through her recovery. She tells me some time
later, 'I don't know if you believed me. I thought, He thinks I'm
telling fibs. I don't know whether he believes this is working on me!'
But as I examine her, it is obvious that her coordination, the jerkiness
of her hands and her ability to stand with eyes closed all are better,
if not totally normal. My pessimism was clearly misplaced. Over the next
few months, we settle into a pattern. As the infusion wears off, her
walking and co-ordination deteriorate, a signal that another is
required. Every eight weeks, she comes into hospital for a repeat
infusion, and within a week or so is back on form. Each time I am due to
see her in my clinic and I see her name on the list for the day, there
is trepidation that she will not appear, the treatment having
accelerated her cancer. But each time, as I go into the waiting room, I
am greeted with 'Hello, Dr Leschziner!', though she struggles to
pronounce my name -- a feature of my name rather than her disease. And
the months slowly turn into years, with our familiar dance of chat,
assessment and approval of the next few sessions of treatment. Six years
after we first meet, she is still walking into my clinic, still
functioning, still independent. The last time we meet, it is at her
house. I am greeted at the door by her husband, whom she has talked
about but whom I have never met. I am ushered into the living room,
where she sits, and I can immediately see that there is a new edge to
her frailty, her cheeks more hollowed, her eyes more sunken. She has
known that she is dying for the past six years, but the news

that she has been living in expectation of has finally arrived.
Investigations for abdominal pain have led to the discovery that her
cancer has spread, and once again the decision has been made to give
palliative care. 'I've decided not to go for any more treatment,' she
says. 'It's just too painful and I'm very weak; I can't even go to
investigate this lump. And as it's not giving me any pain, I said I'd
rather live with it for as long as I can.' As we chat, and I look around
the room, I see a life well-lived, of adventure, of love, of family. I
realise that although we have spent time together, most of our
interactions have been focused on the practical. There are other things
that have gone unsaid, stories untold. Despite her current situation,
she is accepting and philosophical. She has had many years to consider
her mortality, and has outlived everyone's predictions, including her
own. Discussing her decision to abstain from further treatment for her
cancer, she says, 'I'm quite happy with that. All in all, I've had a
good innings with all that I'm carrying. I've had a good life. I've
travelled all over the world, I've had an exciting life, thanks to my
husband. And I've got wonderful family. I'm taken care of, you know? I'm
comfortable.' As I depart and say my goodbyes, I am certain in my own
mind that Rahel and I will not meet again. And a couple of months later
I receive the expected news -- that Rahel has passed away; her date of
death a day after her date of birth. Sixty-one years and one day. 'A
good innings', Rahel described it, but it was a short innings too, and
for the last six years hampered by her nervous system, betrayed by her
senses. Proprioception, a sensation that we are mostly unaware of, does
not enter our minds day to day or even year to year -- a stark contrast
to the sensation of pain. Much like Rahel, quiet, unassuming, just
getting on with it, it is only in its absence that its mark is felt.
There is something else we can learn from Rahel and Paul -- that
sensation is not simply the act of touch, the ability to feel hot or
cold, dry or wet, soft-touch, pinprick or pressure; that it is not even
one sense; that various aspects of our sensation, whether obvious or
not, define our understanding of the rules that govern our world; that
certain actions are hazardous to life and limb, detrimental to our
survival, damaging us both physically and psychologically; that even the
act of combatting gravity, by standing up, is an extremely complex
activity and as much reliant on sensation as on muscle strength; and
that we are all vulnerable to profound

alterations to our perception of our world through tiny changes to our
nervous system, an infinitesimally small disruption in our genetic code
or a tiny glitch in our immune system, turning our lives upside down.
OceanofPDF.com

2 ZOMBIE FACES

'... just because you see something, it doesn't mean to say it's there.
And if you don't see something it doesn't mean to say it's not there,
it's only what your senses bring to your attention.' Douglas Adams, The
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy

True to form, and despite the glass roof of Piccadilly station, as I get
off the train in Manchester, I can feel spots of rain somehow making
their way onto my face. It is raining indoors, droplets splashing
through the vents above my head. This is the city of my upbringing,
where I spent my formative years. I feel disloyal writing it, but until
I left Manchester to go to university, I genuinely thought that the sun
almost never shone in the United Kingdom, that somehow Britain only had
three seasons, spring showers dissolving seamlessly into the damp of
autumn leaves. I am sure that my memory is unfair, but sitting on the
lawns of Oxford in the summer sun, it seemed like a different country.
And today the weather does nothing to dissuade me of my prejudices. It
is filthy cold, with horizontal rain that no amount of waterproofing can
resist; a life-sapping, penetrating damp chill that one rarely
encounters in London. I get on the tram and, as we pass through the city
centre, through the rain-streaked windows I can see the industrial
buildings so familiar to me. Cavernous red-brick warehouses and mills,
witnesses to the city's central role in the global cotton industry. As
we pass over a canal, the water surface is rippled by raindrops. Damp
patches spot the painted graffiti under bridges, water seeping through
the walls. Fuelled by the cotton-spinning mills of Cheshire and south
Lancashire, the city expanded rapidly in the nineteenth century to
become one of the lights of the Industrial Revolution.

Canals were dug to bring freight directly into the city, vast palaces of
industrialisation were built, and Manchester became rich. This pedigree
of technology persisted beyond its heyday -- the city with the world's
first intercity passenger station went on to become the site of the
first splitting of the atom by Ernest Rutherford, the world's first
digital computer and, as recently as 2004, the discovery of graphene. It
was this technological base that brought my family here from Germany in
1980, my father's academic career drawn to the University of Manchester.
The worker bee, adopted as a symbol of Manchester 150 years ago, adorns
buildings, lamp posts and street bollards, denoting the work ethic,
industry and hive of activity that Manchester represented. In the
aftermath of the terrorist incident in 2017, at Ariana Grande's concert
at the Manchester Arena, killing 23 and injuring 139 concert-goers, the
bee symbol became a show of public unity and pride in the city, with
large numbers of Mancunians having it tattooed on their skin as part of
a fundraising campaign. As I trundle through the city-centre streets on
the tram, I can see a resurrected city. Coffee shops, restaurants, the
previously pollution-stained buildings licked into shape, a few
high-rise towers smattering the skyline. Even now, however, a mere
stone's throw from the city's beating heart, there are patches of
neglected wasteland, signs of a rejuvenation project still in progress.
In the 1980s, the era of my schooldays, Manchester had been in decline
for quite some time, beset by social problems, poverty and crime. The
city centre was very rough around the edges, and those massive brick
buildings proudly proclaiming their glorious past were mere shells. I
recall catching the train home, passing the old factories and warehouses
lining the tracks: building after building, each several hundred metres
long with multiple storeys, with literally every pane of glass broken
through vandalism or neglect; like ex-heavyweight champions of the
world, long past their prime, muscle gone to fat, faces scarred and
battered, teeth all knocked out. But in the midst of all of this,
Manchester was the location of a glorious revival of another sort. The
grim environment, the dire economic climate, coupled with the strong
Mancunian sense of fun, led to an escape in the form of music. Starting
with The Smiths, New Order and Simply Red, by the late '80s and early
'90s the bands that constituted the soundtrack of my teenage life were
the Stone Roses, Happy Mondays, James, Inspiral Carpets, 808

State and, later, Oasis. Through this 'Madchester' cultural scene, the
pride of Manchester was restored, this time through music rather than
the smoking chimneys of the Industrial Revolution. The city was re-cast
as the coolest place on earth, in our own minds at least. Boddingtons,
'the Cream of Manchester', was the beer of choice in pubs throughout the
UK, or so it seemed to us at the time. I hear the opening bars of a
Stone Roses song and I am immediately transported back to being sixteen
and deeply uncool in the midst of the city. I get off the tram in
Chorlton, a couple of miles away from my old school. By the time I get
to the house that is my destination, I am soaked through, and as I stand
in the porch waiting for the door to open, water drips off my jacket, my
trousers sodden. A woman a few years younger than me opens the door,
smiles and ushers me into the dry warmth of the house. She introduces
herself as Nina. I feel a little guilty as puddles of water form on the
polished wooden floorboards. The house is dark as there are no lights
on, but I can see it is beautifully decorated and immaculately tidy.
Once dried off, jacket hanging up, I follow Nina into the modern kitchen
and she suggests a cup of coffee, an offer I take up eagerly. While she
potters around the kitchen, I have an opportunity to survey my
surroundings. As I look around, I see I am inside a homage to that
Madchester music scene. The walls are adorned with album covers,
artworks, a portrait of the Stone Roses' lead singer, Ian Brown. In one
corner, there is a colourful frame surrounding a painted maraca,
instantly recognisable to someone of my vintage and origin. I comment
upon it. 'Yes, that is one of Bez's,' Nina tells me, referring to the
dancer, mascot and maraca player from the Happy Mondays, famed for his
bizarre, wild-eyed gyrations, fuelled by huge amounts of mind-altering
substances. Nina tells me, 'One of our friends is an artist who
decorated lots of his maracas. It was a gift.' But as I look around
further, I notice signs of the reason why I am here. As Nina makes the
coffee, she clips small devices onto the sides of the mugs, and as she
pours from the kettle, they beep as the mugs are filled. Next to the
kitchen counter, attached to the wall, is a series of hooks from which
hang three white sticks. And this is the reason why none of the lights
are on -- for Nina is almost completely blind. Lights on or off, it
makes very little difference.

As I sit opposite Nina, I can see that while her right eye is clear, her
left is subtly different, orientated towards a slightly different
direction. I soon learn that the clear right eye is not an eye at all.
It is a prosthesis, a false eye. In all other regards, she looks totally
unremarkable -- slim, unlined face, clear skin, in a brightly coloured
jumper and jeans. She speaks with the vowels of the north-west of
England, an accent infrequently heard in London that warms my heart,
like a smell reminiscent of childhood, familiar and comforting. And
given the way she moves around the house, her lack of vision is
imperceptible to an onlooker. It wasn't always like this. When she was
born, Nina's vision was normal. But at the age of two, she caught the
flu. Although she recovered, the virus seems to have triggered
inflammation within her eyeballs called chronic uveitis, slowly robbing
her of her sight by scarring her corneas, the clear windows through
which all light enters. I ask her what she remembers of her childhood.
'I don't remember much from when I was a child, especially when it comes
to my sight; I remember it varied a lot over time. I went to a primary
school, a special school purely for blind or visually impaired children.
My memories are mainly of school and the great attention and help I
got.' She remembers being taken out of her first year of secondary
school for surgery, at the age of twelve. 'I had a corneal transplant
and a new lens. They told me that the cataract was stuck to the eyeball,
so they had to cut it out with the cornea.' I ask her what her vision
was like as a child, if she could recognise people's faces. 'I was very
short-sighted,' she explains. 'People had to be close to me for me to
recognise them. The vision fluctuated. When it was at its worst, it was
all very foggy, like looking at a steamed mirror in the bathroom. And I
had to use magnification for large print.' In her teens and twenties,
however, as technology advanced, Nina went on to have a series of
further operations. 'From that first surgery, when I was twelve, I went
on to have five more corneal grafts. But the grafts kept on rejecting.'
After each procedure, performed on one eye at any one time, her vision
would improve -- 'the fog, the steam had gone; my vision was a lot
crisper and clearer' -- but as the corneal grafts were rejected by her
own body, the immune system kicking in and damaging the tissue of
strangers, her vision would start to blur and fog up again. With each
transplant came the promise

of better sight, only to be followed by bitter disappointment again in
the months afterwards. A rollercoaster of hope and despair. Her last
transplant, at the age of twenty-five, was different. She was referred
to the world-famous Moorfields Eye Hospital, in central London. Just off
the horrendously busy Old Street roundabout, the original Victorian
faÃ§ade hides a rabbit warren of clinics, operating theatres and testing
facilities delivering the best treatment that ophthalmology can provide.
The surgeon Nina had been referred to had begun to use particular drugs
to suppress her immune system alongside these transplants; an effort to
stave off rejection. She underwent a further corneal transplant on the
right eye in 2008. 'It went really well,' Nina says. 'Straight after the
graft, I was very wary -- Oh, it's just going to fail, like it has done
every other time. But afterwards, I had amazing vision. I could read a
newspaper for the first time in my life without having to use a
magnifier. It didn't only clear the vision; it enabled me to see smaller
print as well. I was over the moon.' Despite side effects from the
medication, the improvement in her vision was worth it. And this state
of affairs continued. 'So, a year to the week from me having that
surgery,' Nina chuckles nervously, then pauses, 'I had an accident at
work. I was working in an office. There was a metal leaflet-dispenser
stand in a box, stacked on top of a printer. The box fell, and one of
the dispensers caught the corner of my eye.' She pauses again, but then
continues to tell her story without a hint of emotion. I am shocked, not
only by the turn of events but also her ability to tell me this without
dissolving into tears. 'It burst my eyeball, and they couldn't save it
at all. It was definitely a life-changing moment -- 2009, January the
twelfth. I remember the date.' The right eye, the recipient of this last
corneal graft that had held so well, was now destroyed beyond hope of
rescue by a hideous twist of fate, to be replaced by a prosthesis, an
artificial eye. Nina continues: 'The surgeon said that he would look to
do the left eye, but obviously he wanted me to come to terms with
everything, and to allow everything to settle down on the right side. At
this point, the left eye had rejected the cornea they'd replaced five
years earlier.' Overnight, Nina went from reading a newspaper without
aids to once again being almost blind; her right eye obliterated and the
left eye providing only the most basic, hazy vision. 'I was left with
that sliver of vision to cope with.' Thinking back to that window of
time with good vision, she

says, 'It didn't feel very long. Just a year. I suppose, in my lifetime,
it wasn't very long.' A measure of Nina's resilience, she went back to
work. But she found it difficult, and when she fell pregnant it all got
too much. She decided to leave work and to concentrate on being a
mother. Her son, Dylan, was born in 2010 and she got on with her life,
using home adaptations such as the liquid-level indicators, those
beeping devices clipped onto the coffee mugs. She describes her
PenFriend, a device that, when held over the labels of household
objects, plays a recorded message describing the contents of a container
or the nature of an object. Throughout this period, she continued to go
to Moorfields every so often, to touch base with her surgeon. The vision
in her remaining eye had continued to deteriorate further, and in 2016
yet another corneal graft was proposed, this time a partial graft on her
left eye. 'I still had really good light perception. If Dylan was sat
next to me on the sofa, I could see him, but I couldn't make out the
details of his face. It was a risk, and it was my remaining eye. Do we
take the risk, or do we not? So ... we went for it!' In contrast to
previous grafts, this one was done under local, rather than general,
anaesthesia. Nina recalls lying on the operating table with a plastic
sheet over her head, the eye exposed. With the local anaesthetic, she
could feel no pain, only tugging. 'It was very strange. Have you ever
seen one of those films where the alien comes out with the light behind
it, and you just see the shadow of the fuzzy alien coming through the
door of the spaceship? That is what it was like, seeing him over me. It
was very surreal. And they allowed me to choose the music in the room as
well.' I ask her what she chose. 'The Stone Roses,' she laughs.
Obviously. In the recovery period, she had to lie flat on her back for a
week. A bubble of air had been injected into the eye, maintaining
pressure against the new tissue of the cornea. But once she'd recovered,
she found there had been a huge improvement in her sight. 'It wasn't as
good as before I'd lost my right eye. I could read again, but it had to
be large print. I had to use magnification. But once I had magnified
things, I could read them perfectly well.' In the context of better
vision, Nina decided to concentrate on what she wanted to do with her
life. 'A lot of my life has been taken up by my sight problems, and
every time I got to do something, or get a direction, I got

taken back down by my sight.' She had studied design and art direction
at university, and in the hiatus between losing her right eye and the
most recent surgery, she had developed an interest in arts and crafts.
'It really helps psychologically. I just didn't think I could do
anything else. I thought, I'm not going to be able to use the computer
to do the graphic design that I was trained in. I'm not going to be able
to do anything like that now. My auntie said, "Well, you know, you still
are creative. That's what inspires you. That's what gives you that fire
in your belly. So let's try something different. Still creative but
something different." So, she took me to this bead-making class. I was
like, "No, I can't do it." But she said, "Come on, we're going!" So we
went and I made just a basic, simple necklace. And because it was
tactile, while it was not really easy, I could do it, and I was really
pleased with myself. And I was like, "Who needs eyes? I can still do
something."' She laughs. 'And so I really got into that then, full steam
-- starting to make jewellery.' With new-found enthusiasm, after
regaining some vision, she decided to start her own business. She set up
a creative cafÃ© -- quite amazing, considering that not only was she
still healing from her surgery and coping with still quite limited
vision, but was also a mother to her young son. 'I wanted to bring a
space to people where they could come and get creative, and lose
themselves in creativity. Forget about all the worries and the stresses
and just lose themselves in that. We did really well. We had bookings
every weekend for kids, craft parties ... The kids absolutely loved it.
We ran creative adult workshops in the evenings. And I was doing really
well on social media, getting a great following. And I think that is
when it all began to unravel.' I ask her what she means. Nina pauses for
a second. 'Obviously, because I'd set the business up alone, I didn't
have a business partner or anything. I had a lot of help from family --
my family have always been a rock -- but I was determined to do it
myself. I think I just took too much on, because I was doing it all
myself. I was doing the HR, the finance, the PR, the staffing, the
training, the front-of-house. I was doing all of it. And I think it just
got too much. And then one morning, a Wednesday, the twenty-ninth of
August, 2018, I was getting my son ready for school...' For the first
time since we have been talking, I hear a tremble in her voice. Her left
eye glistens, and she gulps. I ask her if she wants to stop for a

moment. She takes a deep breath. 'No, it's okay.' Another pause, before
she carries on. 'We were having a bit of a clear-out in the house. We
had bin bags everywhere. There was a broken TV on the dining table, and
my briefcase was on the other side of the table, with the bank machine
in. I was trying to get my son ready, I was trying to do the payroll for
the staff because it was payday, and went to get the bank machine out of
my briefcase. I was rushing, so instead of moving the bin bags out of
the way, like a normal person would do, I climbed over, leaned down to
get the machine out of the briefcase and basically headbutted the corner
of the TV.' I wince, knowing what comes next. 'It burst the eyeball. It
just burst a hole. And they told me that 95 per cent of the retina came
out from the back of the eye through this hole. They told me that the
corneal graft and the lens and everything at the front of the eye all
stayed intact,' she smiles sadly. 'But they couldn't save the retina,
only 5 per cent of it. I knew exactly what I'd done because it was the
same as the right eye. Everything went black, and then I saw some
lightning bolts, which I was later told was the retina detaching.' A
small sob emanates from her. In the aftermath of this tragic accident,
Nina was lying on the hospital bed, recovering from the unsuccessful
attempt to save her retina. Lying there, silent in her own darkness, she
began to see -- simple colours, waves of red and blue, muted not bright.
She turned to her mother and husband, sitting next to her bed, and said,
'I can see something!' She could sense the two of them twitching with
excitement, in the hope that some of her vision had been preserved: '"Oh
my God, she says she can see something! She might be okay!"' An urgent
call to the doctor was made, but when he arrived he told her it was just
her imagination playing tricks on her. Her husband and mother bridled at
this, insisting that he check. But while she could perceive the light of
the doctor's torch shone into her eye, there was nothing else. 'But I
knew I could see these colours!' Nina says. A second operation was
performed, to see if the surgeons could further salvage any of her
retina. But when she came round after surgery, a brutal message was
delivered. Nina remembers: 'They were very, very blunt about everything:
"You have lost your sight. You'll never be able to see again." And I
understand why doctors are like that. They have to be, I suppose. But
there was definitely no emotion in it.' I ask her, from today's
perspective,

how she would have liked this news to be conveyed. 'I know they couldn't
give me any hope, because there wasn't really any to give me. My sight
had gone. I just think that the way that they delivered the message was
just a bit harsh. I think you could be softer. Okay, it might be that
you can't save my sight, and I understand that, 100 per cent, but I am
still a human being with emotions that's going through a very difficult
time. You know, I'm having to deal, and come to terms, with this.' A
lesson in how not to deliver awful news. Since that fateful day, Nina
has been left in almost complete darkness -- 'almost', because there is
a tiny sliver of perception of the outside world. 'I still get a bit of
light perception. It's on the left-hand side.' She points to an area
just above the horizontal, a little to the left. 'If you imagine a black
sheet, and then on the left there is a tiny little kidney-bean-shaped
hole. And if you shine a torch behind the sheet, the light comes through
that kidney bean.' But despite her devastating visual loss, and the
doctors' warnings, over the coming weeks and months Nina began to see.
The waves of colour she had previously seen evolved into shapes, then
patterns, and an ever-broader palette of colours. The blues and reds
changed to yellows, purples and oranges, and eventually all the colours
of the rainbow. 'They were geometric shapes. At points it could look
like a kaleidoscope, at other times like a mosaic or a smashed tile.' As
time went on, these images became more intricate, more complex. 'At
first, I didn't really want to tell anybody, because obviously the first
time I told someone, I was shot down. I just got more worried. If they
didn't believe me when it was just red and blue waves, how are they
going to believe me now?' For the first month, she told no one at all,
not even her husband or mother. When they would ask if she was still
seeing the colours, she would lie and say no. All the while, her vision
filled with psychedelic colours, patterns and shapes. But as these
images she was seeing rapidly progressed, she could no longer keep it to
herself. 'Eventually, the shapes started turning into faces --
cartoonish, animated. And then I began to see zombie faces; still
cartoonish, but scary all the same -- blood dripping from their eyes,
and gnarly teeth. I knew they weren't real, but I was still scared. So I
did speak to my mum. So then she told my husband, who told my auntie...'
She chuckles; the perils of a large Irish family. Soon, everyone knew.

Nina clearly recognised that these visions weren't real. Initially, when
she first mentioned the colours to a doctor in hospital, he suggested it
might be light refracting or reflecting in the eyeball, so she assumed
that it was indeed something to do with her eyes. But as the news of her
hallucinations spread through the family, an army of relatives was
deployed on the internet, and their searches quickly identified the
hallucinations of Charles Bonnet syndrome. For 250 years, the Republic
of Geneva encompassed the south-west tip of the lake that bears its
name. In 1798, precipitated by the execution by guillotine of
Robespierre in Paris, the French army marched in, annexing the Republic
for a short period of time. The Republic was briefly reestablished for a
couple of years before it became the twenty-second canton of the Swiss
Confederation. But in the midst of a time of peace, in the mideighteenth
century, one of the Republic's residents was a lawyer named Charles
Bonnet. While a career in law paid the bills, Bonnet's true passion was
the natural world. His fascination with insects and botany resulted in a
litany of books and correspondence. But among his publications was a
significant detour. In 1760, Bonnet wrote an essay on his grandfather's
unusual experiences. At the age of ninety, Charles Lullin had undergone
cataract surgery to both eyes and, much like Nina, had had an initial
improvement before his vision began to fail. But what was taken away
with one hand was given with the other. As Lullin's sight failed, he
began to experience visions of another sort: vivid and detailed
hallucinations of people, animals, carriages; others of buildings or
changes in the tapestries hanging on the walls of his home. He knew that
these were not real. It is all very reminiscent of Nina's experiences.
One of the hallmark features of the hallucinations of Charles Bonnet
syndrome -- a term coined not by Bonnet himself but by neurologists at
the turn of the twentieth century -- is the vision of small people,
termed Lilliputian, after the islanders of Lilliput in Jonathan Swift's
Gulliver's Travels. The visions are vividly described in a paper from
the 1920s: Small people, men or women of minute or slightly variable
height; either above or accompanied by small animals or small objects
all

relatively proportionate in size, with the result that the individual
must see a world such as created by Swift in Gulliver. These
hallucinations are mobile, coloured, generally multiple. It is a
veritable Lilliputian vision. Sometimes it is a theatre of small
marionettes, scenes in miniature which appear to the eyes of the
surprised patient. All this little world, clothed generally in bright
colours, walks, runs, plays and works in relief and perspective; these
microscopic visions give an impression of real life. Bonnet described
these vividly in his essay detailing his grandfather's visions. Lullin
reported ladies or young girls immaculately dressed and coiffured,
dancing or carrying objects in their hands or inverted tables on their
heads. He described amazing details of diamond pendants, pearls, ribbons
and other adornments. But Lullin, like Nina, also saw more elemental
visions -- whirling particles, clover patterns overlying everything in
his vision, or the spinning spokes of a wheel. Our understanding of the
significance of Charles Bonnet syndrome has changed in the intervening
100 years. Initially denoting visual hallucinations in the elderly who
are otherwise 'cognitively intact' (meaning without evidence of dementia
or other neurological disease), it now refers to hallucinations in the
context of any eye disease, in the knowledge that these hallucinations
are not real. As Nina illustrates, being elderly is not a prerequisite.
In fact, any eye disease can cause Charles Bonnet syndrome; you do not
even need to be blind. The risk of these hallucinations increases with
worsening vision, but you only need to have a drop in vision equivalent
to about half-way down the optician's eye chart to experience these
phenomena. Of course, Charles Bonnet Syndrome -- the brain's desire to
see, even in the absence of vision -- is not the only explanation of
visual hallucinations. Visions of unreality are a common feature of
psychosis. The major distinction is that, while in psychosis these
hallucinations are indistinguishable from reality, in conditions other
than psychosis people can clearly understand that they have no basis in
fact, no matter how realistic or frightening. And there are many other
causes of these kinds of phenomena. Every week, I run sleep clinics and
general neurology clinics at Guy's Hospital in

London Bridge, and epilepsy clinics at St Thomas' Hospital in
Westminster. They give me a change of scene, with different London
landmarks as I walk between the two hospitals -- the Shard and Tower
Bridge at one site, the Houses of Parliament at the other. Occasionally,
I get the River Bus to work, stepping off the catamaran at Embankment or
at London Bridge pier. Despite living in this city for twenty-five
years, at times like this I cannot shake the feeling that I am a
tourist, particularly when the sky is clear and the Thames glistens in
the sunlight, the usual murky brown of the water tinged blue. In part,
the separation of these clinics is logistical. The sleep and neurology
departments are distinct, and often require slightly different tests and
services. But, if I am totally honest, it happens to also facilitate my
intellectual laziness. Sometimes, the continuous stream of individuals
with a limited range of conditions contributes to my diagnostic focus,
being either in the 'epilepsy zone' or the 'sleep zone'; a form of
diagnostic blinkers, with its advantages and disadvantages. But in fact
there is significant overlap between the world of epilepsy and sleep;
similar techniques of studying the brain, similar medications, and
sometimes similar manifestations. And for people with epilepsy, sleep is
of fundamental importance. Poor sleep can precipitate seizures, small
seizures can disrupt sleep, and anti-epileptic drugs may cause
sleepiness or change the very nature of sleep. It is for this reason
that Susan sits before me today, in my sleep clinic. She has grey hair,
cut short, her face lined by years in the sun; as we talk, I learn that
she has spent some fifteen years living in the Caribbean, nursing her
elderly mother-in-law, whose recent death precipitated Susan's return to
the UK. I wax lyrical about the delights of the West Indies (my
extensive knowledge of it is limited to films and TV) and how tough it
must be to come back to the cold, colourless UK, but Susan quickly puts
me firmly in my place. 'I couldn't wait to come back,' she says. 'It's
nice for a holiday, but there is nothing to do. It is so boring!' She
proceeds to tell me of the poverty, the crime and the rampant alcohol
problems of the community she lived in, shattering my illusions of
paradise. The lack of proper medical care has been highly problematic
there, and her return a couple of years ago has allowed her to seek
treatment again. She has been referred to me by her epilepsy specialist
at one of our sister

hospitals. She has lived almost a lifetime of epilepsy, her existence
punctuated by seizures -- full stops, exclamation marks or semi-colons
fragmenting the text of her life. Her specialist has noted that she has
terrible sleep and, in an effort to improve her epilepsy, he has asked
me to see her. In the normal functioning brain, networks of neurones in
the cerebral cortex -- the grey matter that forms the outermost layer of
the brain -- communicate in a highly regulated manner. Everything
isorderly, conversations between cells like whispers in the corridors of
a huge bureaucratic organisation. But if something disrupts this normal
functioning, be it damage to the cortex by a stroke, tumour or
infection, or an alteration of how electrical signals are transmitted,
through drugs or genetic mutations, the brakes on these impulses are
taken off. The tightly controlled activity degenerates and the whispered
conversations are replaced by deafening screaming and shouting. The
corridors are filled with chaos, and huge swathes of neurones discharge
in synchrony, causing dysfunction. Like the ripples on the surface of a
pond provoked when a stone is thrown, this disturbance of normal
function spreads across the surface of the brain. Dysfunction moves from
one part of the cortex to adjacent regions, until either the seizure
peters out or the whole brain is affected, causing a generalised
convulsion. Now sixty-two years old, Susan has had seizures since the
age of eight. Her medications have changed over the years. Some have had
no effect at all; others caused side effects. One drug caused insomnia,
but after switching to another, the insomnia very much persisted. At
least there has been an improvement in her seizures. She has not had a
full-blown convulsion -- the dramatic collapses with violent shaking we
usually associate with epilepsy -- for more than a year. But her
seizures continue, several days a week, sometimes several times a day.
Not generalised convulsions, but more unusual events, evidence of
uncontrolled electrical activity in limited parts of her brain. We
discuss her sleep, but it is the nature of her seizures that fascinates
me. Susan recalls her first seizure as a child. She was in the local
swimming pool with her sister, splashing about. A boy, being irritating
in a boy-like way, had begun splahing water in her face. She closed her
eyes, but remembers droplets of water landing on her eyelids, the
fluorescent lighting of the pool perceptible with eyes closed. A sudden
sensation of nausea

followed, and she turned to her sister complaining of feeling sick.
'Then I don't remember any more. I just woke up in the hospital. They
said I'd had a seizure.' I ask her if she knew what that meant, at her
tender age, but she tells me she had no idea. The doctors talked to her
parents, not her, and she simply sat in the room listening to the
conversation. Further convulsions followed. She would lose control of
her bladder function, and her entire body would ache for days from the
violent shaking. I ask her how it affected her childhood. She was one of
nine siblings, the oldest thirteen years her senior, the youngest four
years her junior. She was accompanied by a team of family bodyguards
wherever she went. 'There were a lot of us, so I could go to the park
with my sisters and brothers. We still went swimming, but they had to
keep an eye on me.' Over time, it became clear that there were
particular triggers for Susan's seizures. Flashing lights or flickering
in her vision; sitting on a train with the sunlight falling across her
face, shadows of the rail-side poles simulating a pulsating light; the
reflection of a television on the walls of the living room; a strobe
light in the local disco at the age of sixteen, abruptly ending her
clubbing days; even the visual stimulation of certain types of plants
swaying in the breeze (plants with soft leaves, when the leaves move
independent of each other); and, bizarrely, the transient change in
light caused by closing her eyes during a sneeze. Susan ha
photosensitive epilepsy, which means certain visual patterns or stimuli
trigger abnormal electrical activity in the visual areas of her brain.
Something about these areas of her brain means that the normal
processing of visual information is unrestricted. Even the act of seeing
can precipitate these seizures. What is normally highly regulated,
dampened down, has lost its brake. Like a car suddenly jumping out of
gear and rolling down a hill, accelerating out of control. For most
people with this type of epilepsy, the cause is genetic -- a mutation or
multiple minor genetic changes altering the function of those ubiquitous
ion channels, making the entire nervous system more excitable than it
should be. But investigations have shown that in Susan there is an
alternative explanation. Detailed scans of her brain have identified
some unusual findings. The blueprint for our nervous system is formed
when we are still small embryos inside our mother's womb. Roughly three
to four weeks after

fertilisation, a small crest of tissue forms, running from the top to
the bottom of the embryo, slowly folding over itself to form a tube.
This neural tube is the basis for our central nervous system, creating
the brain and spinal cord over the coming weeks. But later in our
development, the cells that eventually create our cerebral cortex also
migrate from here. Their birthplace is on the inside of that neural
tube, gradually being pulled through the substance of the brain tissue
to come to their final position on the outside of the brain. But the
scan of Susan's brain shows that something has gone not quite to plan in
the back of her brain, in the occipital lobes, the area of the brain
responsible for vision. Small island of tissue, cells that should have
made it to the brain's surface, remain suspended in the substance of the
brain itself. Small nodules of what should have been cerebral cortex are
floating deep under the surface. The normally carefully regulated
organisation of this area of the brain is disrupted. The usual checks
and balances on the cerebral cortex have been unsettled, leaving this
brain area liable to a loss of control. Certain visual stimuli trigger
abnormal electrical activity, and Susan's subsequent seizures. But what
really grabs my attention is Susan's description of the prelude to her
previous convulsions. She describes her auras, the warning that a
seizure is about to happen. 'I begin to see different coloured balls
appearing in front of me. They then float across my eyes, and then they
start to pulsate. They veer left. Then suddenly I just see everything go
white, and I'm gone.' The next thing she realises is coming round,
usually on the ground, aching throughout her body, wet from
incontinence. I ask her about the coloured balls in a bit more detail.
She reports circular shapes, different colours, invariably starting just
to the upper left of her centre of vision. They begin to throb before
tracking further left. Sometimes, a split second before losing
consciousness, she feels her eyes being irrepressibly drawn to the left.
Then all goes blank. 'I can't control that pull. And that is when I know
a big seizure is going to happen.' While the changes in her medication
have brought her epilepsy under better control over the past year and
she has not had any full-blown convulsions in a while now, the auras --
essentially smaller seizures -- continue unabated, although with some
minor alterations. She tells me she is still having them on a regular
basis, sometimes several times a week. But if the blob do not throb or
veer to the left, she knows she will be okay; the

aura will pass after a few seconds, disappearing as quickly as it came.
The medication has inhibited the seizure activity, limiting it to a
small part of the cerebral cortex and preventing this unregulated
electrical activity from spreading more widely, to the whole of the
brain, staving off a generalised convulsion. She is describing a
textbook occipital lobe seizure. As with all epilepsy, the experience of
it depends on where in the brain the abnormal electrical activity
arises. And this is particularly the case for seizures arising from the
visual areas of the brain. The most common manifestations of this type
of epilepsy are what are termed 'elementary visual hallucinations',
precisely what Susan is describing. Coloured, often multicoloured,
circular patterns, spots, circles or balls. Sometimes, as the seizure
progresses, the components multiply and enlarge, beginning to move, as
the electrical activity spreads across the primary visual cortex, the
area of the surface of the brain that is the direct input for visual
information, where crude sensory impressions are received. For anyone
who has suffered from migraine, these symptoms may be a little familiar.
It is common for people with migraine headaches to experience an aura, a
symptom that may precede the headache. Indeed, the first warning I
myself have that a migraine is going to arise is a little flickering in
the extreme edges of my field of vision, initially so subtle that I am
not sure if I am imagining it. As it develops, and with it the certainty
that this is indeed a migraine aura, I find it increasingly difficult to
see through this area of flickering, which gradually grows and spreads
cross my visual field. It is at that point that I reach for the
ibuprofen, knowing what is to follow. Very occasionally, I can see
wiggly lines or zigzags, always black and white, progressing across my
vision, a harbinger of pain. And this aura of migraine, like that of
epilepsy, is the spread of a change in electrical activity crawling
across my visual cortex, activating and disrupting my vision at the
level of the brain. But it is the nature of that electrical change that
differs in migraine. Rather than the rapid, highly disorganised
discharges of epilepsy, in migraine this is more controlled, spreading
more slowly, activating the neurones in a different way. The slow burn
of a candle wick versus a spark touching gunpowder. In Susan's case, as
the seizure spreads from the primary visual cortex it affects areas of
the brain further forward, including regions involved in eye movement --
causing the sensation of her eyes being pulled -- before the whole of
the brain is involved. But in epilepsy there are also other ways in

which vision can be disturbed. The nature of these disturbances directly
informs us of some of the organisational make-up of the processing of
vision. The act of seeing is so much more than registering that an image
has fallen on your retina. Imagine seeing a family member or a friend.
You see her face atop her shoulders, in the doorway of your house. You
recognise her, understand her relationship to you, remember what she
means to you, recall the last time you saw her. In order to make sense
of the eyes, the nose, the mouth in front of you, there are two crucial
bits of processing required. The first is: what does it all mean? What
is this object, what is its significance, what are its associations? You
understand that it is a face, a face familiar to you, that it belongs to
your mother, who you love. The second important bit of information is:
where is this face? Is it close or is it far? Is it close enough for me
to talk to, to hug? Is that face coming closer or going away? Do I need
to open the door wide to welcome her, or shut it behind her? Without the
'what' and the 'where', a face is meaningless, just a collection of
features without any substance. So for normal vision, it is not just
seeing that is important. The process of making sense of the visual
world requires integration with other cognitive processes, other areas
of the brain. Streams of information therefore need to percolate from
the primary visual cortex, at the tip of the occipital lobe, above the
nape of the neck, to the areas of the brain interpreting meaning and
location. The 'what' pathway flows forward into the temporal lobes,
areas of the brain important for ascribing meaning to visual and verbal
cues, integrating with memories. Within the temporal lobes are areas
responsible for recognition of visual objects, like faces, or other
complex images. And depending on where seizures arise, as we move
forward from the vsual cortex to the temporal lobe, the nature of visual
hallucinations triggered can also become more complex: people, animals,
figures or scenes; sometimes familiar, at others frightening.

Figure 2. The 'what' and 'where' pathways of vision. Visual information
is initially relayed to the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe,
where conscious vision begins. From here, visual information flows up
towards the parietal lobe, which is involved in the integration of
spatial orientation and movement (the 'where'), and forward to the
temporal lobe, where meaning is ascribed to visual objects, colours,
shapes and faces (the 'what').

Susan describes a second type of seizure, one that I have never come
across before. This has only developed in the past couple of years.
'It's just arisen out of the blue. Each time the same. It lasts twenty
or thirty seconds, then disappears.' She begins to describe these
events, but they are difficult to explain and equally difficult to
comprehend. In keeping with other people with epilepsy, sometimes the
experiences themselves are so beyond our scope of understanding that
they are almost impossible to articulate. She begins, 'It's like a
negative. Like looking at a photograph. But if you are in front of me, I
can see what is behind you.' She goes on to describe seeing a person
standing in front of her, but also being able to see the scene
immediately behind the person -- the wall, a picture, or anythingelse in
the background that should normally be obstructed by the person in view.
Double vision can often cause people to feel they can see through
objects, the two images misaligned, but Susan is adamant that she sees
one of everything. I ask her if she thinks the colours are inverted,
like a negative image, but she says no. 'It's like someone is
tanslucent, but their image is superimposed on the background.' After
some discussion, we agree that the best way to explain it would be two
old projector slides, one on top of the other, or a double-exposure
print. The image of the foreground and

background superimposed, but without adequate explanation. Susan says,
'There is no explanation, logically, for me to be able to do that. I can
just see through you!' The rationale for Susan's inexplicable X-ray
vision is problematic. Her vision in these moments seems to defy the
laws of physics, a bending of light around a person standing in front of
her. But there is indeed a possible explanation -- that her seizure is
disrupting the 'where' pathway. Somehow, this second type of seizure is
interfering with her perception of visual space, of where everything is
in relation to her world; a dysfunction of perception of where someone
is in relation to the room, perhaps causing the perception of seeing
both the person and the room, reconstructed from visual memory. The
fundamental neurological basis of our map of the world, our location in
it, and even where the various bits of our body are in relation to each
other, resides in the parietal cortex, immediately adjacent to the
occipital cortex, the visual centre of our brain. Interfere with these
circuits, these streams of information from the occipital to the
parietal lobes underlying our 'where' visual pathway, and you interfere
with the knowledge of where visual objects are in space. Seizures
arising in these regions may result in distortion of visual objects,
with faces or people rendered grotesque, or the persistence of visual
objects after they have gone, sometimes repeated over and over within
the field of vision, or, at their most extreme, a tilting or complete
inversion of the visual field. And so it seems that, with medication,
anothe seizure type has come to the fore in Susan's case, another of
these small islands of abnormal cortical tissue triggering small
seizures disrupting the 'where' rather than the 'what'. Susan's visual
hallucinations, be they coloured blobs or distortions of visual space,
illustrate something fundamental. Since seizures are a manifestation of
overactivity of the cerebral cortex, the outer lining of the brain, her
experiences clearly demonstrate that hallucinations originate from the
cerebral cortex itself. The nature of the hallucinations is dependent on
where precisely the seizures are originating from, but it is
dysfunction, or overfunction, of the highly complex network of cells on
the surface of our brains that is the basis of her visions. And this may
provide some important insights into Nina's case too.

Nina recalls Charles Bonnet having previously been mentioned at one of
her appointments. But no description of it, no explanation. At that
point she had no idea that the problem was with her brain, not her eyes.
Armed with the details gleaned from the internet by her family, she went
back to hospital, demanding more information. 'I spoke to my consultant,
and she was really nice and understanding, but really didn't give me any
further information. "Yes, it's Charles Bonnet syndrome. I'll see if I
can get you a leaflet for it." It was like, "You'll just have to go home
and deal with it." It was a very dismissive experience.' Not someone to
simply accept matters, Nina eventually managed to get in touch with a
patient support group providing information and assistance for people
with Charles Bonnet hallucinations. I ask Nina if she is still
experiencing the hallucinations. As we speak, she begins to
simultaneously describe what she is seeing. 'So,imagine that black sheet
with the little kidney bean cut out. It is like the kidney bean draws
the shapes to it. So, flowing round the kidney bean at the moment
there's a kind of blue sausage river.' She laughs. 'People must think
I'm crazy! And then at the bottom of the bean, there is a kind of
patchwork face. And then there are greens, blues and pinks, very muted.'
As we speak she says, 'Now it's changed again. It's just constantly
evolving.' I ask her if she ever sees little people, like those Charles
Bonnet wrote about, but she does not. But she does see little cartoon
characters, such as Bart Simpson or Minnie Mouse, occasionally Mickey
Mouse waving his arms around. Her description reminds me of the watches
prevalent in my childhood, Mickey's arms replaced by the hour and minute
hand, rotating around the clock face. 'Sometimes, they are within a
collage of shapes. It's kind of Where's Wally? -- if you can spot him,'
she chuckles, referring to those illustrations of thousands of little
characters in which you have to find Wally in his redand-white striped
jersey. Nina's current descriptions do not sound particularly scary or
unpleasant. I ask her what it is about her experiences that she finds so
distressing. She pauses again for a beat, considering her answer. She
tells me that although she has now become completely accustomed to them
-- they are a constant in her waking life, present from the minute she
wakes up until she goes to sleep -- the intensity and form of her
hallucinations fluctuates wildly. When she is having a bad day, tired or
stressed, the colours become brighter, more

vivid. And they become much more distracting. 'I find myself walking
into walls or doorframes more, tripping more, because these visions are
in my way.' And the zombie faces stillcome and go. 'It's definitely
connected to my emotions. When I get sad, angry, anxious -- any of those
down emotions -- that is when the zombie faces, devils, dogs, and so on,
will start appearing. When I am happy and relaxed, it's just nice floaty
colours and bubbles and unicorns.' But what is the answer to Nina's
unanswered question: why is this happening? What is it that causes the
brain to generate these images? Is the need to see something, anything,
so intense? Visual hallucinations are of course not peculiar to visual
loss. They can be the result of a huge array of neurological and
psychiatric conditions, such as schizophrenia, the effects of drug use,
Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, even bereavement -- and, as we
have already seen, seizures and migraine. As I have already described,
different areas and pathways within the brain are responsible for
different aspects of visual processing. In fact, various areas of the
cerebral cortex show a degree of specialisation beyond the 'what' and
the 'where' of the visual world. And that specialisation is quite
staggering, with some areas focused on processing colours, objects or
textures, others on familiar faces, eye or mouth movements, body parts,
object recognition, landscapes, or even letters or texts. Watch a yellow
tennis ball flying towards you, and brain activity will increase in the
shape, object, colour and motion areas of the cortex. Watch your partner
smile at you, and the face-recognition and mouth-movement areas will
light up. And, indeed, the same thing happens in the brains of people
experiencing hallucinations, regardless of the underlying cause. If you
are hallucinating the tennis ball or your partner's face, the same areas
will show increased activity on brain-scanning, whether due to Charles
Bonnet syndrome, schizophrenia or anythig else. It is perhaps easier to
understand why changes in brain activity may be related to brain
disease, with associated changes in both the structure of the brain
substance and chemical transmitter systems. But it is less obvious why
eye disease might cause something similar. However, at the heart of this
is the so-called 'deafferentation theory' -- that removal of inputs from
an area of the brain leads to decreased inhibition of that area of
cortex, causing hyperexcitability. Essentially, normal inputs prevent
the brain from generating its own activity. Just as sensory deprivation
in the context of

torture causes people to hallucinate, visual deprivation through eye
disease causes visual hallucinations. If a neurone has all inputs
removed, it may die. But if any inputs are preserved, then that neurone
or the environment it inhabits may adapt. New connections between the
neurone and its neighbours sprout, and existing connections between
neurones may adjust. Normally suppressed connections may increase in
strength. Changes may also occur on either side of these connections
between neurones, in the synapses, with increases in the pool of
chemical transmitters on one side of the synapse and increased
production of receptors on the other side of the gap. The net effect of
these alterations is to trigger activity within that neurone that is
without its normal inputs -- on a larger scale, spontaneous activity of
the cerebral cortex in the absence of information. The perception of
vision in the absence of vision. And, as I will explain later, it is not
just the sense of vision that is subject to deafferentation. So it seems
that, in Charles Bonnet syndrome at least, removal of sensory inputs
predisposes to spontaneous activity in the visual parts of the brain,
and it is the areas of the brain that aremore active that define the
nature of the hallucinations -- whether they are simple or complex,
their colours, shapes or the presence of Lilliputian figures. But there
remains an unanswered question as to why these Charles Bonnet
hallucinations are so characteristic, particularly when it comes to
those tiny figures elaborately dressed in historical costumes. This is
yet to be fully understood. Perhaps it is due to certain highly
specialised areas of the visual cortex being more vulnerable to
deafferentation than others, influencing the nature of what Nina and
others like her see -- faces, figures, distorted in size or shape. But
there is another way to view Nina's hallucinations. In fact not just
Nina's, but others too -- those of people with psychosis, sensory
deprivation and other disorders. And this explanation encompasses all
our senses, not just vision, and ultimately comprises a fundamental
aspect of our perception. We have already seen, from Beecher's
descriptions of the warwounded, that sensation is not simply a process
of gathering information from the periphery and funnelling it to the
brain, but that actually the brain can influence the data being
captured. This is referred to as bottom-up and top-down processing,
respectively. But this two-way flow of information is not limited to
touch sensation, or even our senses in general; it is a feature of how
every tenet of our nervous system works.

When it comes to understanding our world, there are three major flaws in
the system that Nature has provided us with. The first is that the
quantity of information that we are constantly bombarded with is simply
too vast for our limited nervous sstems to be able to process. When we
perceive our world, it is like trying to stream an HD movie over a slow
internet connection. The bandwidth is too narrow for all the data to be
transmitted reliably. The second issue is that we are essentially living
in the past. Due to the make-up of our nerves, spinal cord and brain,
and the connections between neurones -- the synapses, which are reliant
on the release of chemicals to send signals from one nerve cell to
another -- there is an inherent delay in our perception of the world.
Consider standing on a tennis court at Wimbledon. Opposite you stands
your opponent, repeatedly bouncing the ball, readying themselves to
serve at match point. From the moment the ball leaves their racquet, you
have about 400 milliseconds before it is likely to hit you in the face.
When light hits your retina, it takes about 60 milliseconds for those
signals to reach your primary visual cortex, at which point you vaguely
perceive something, but by the time these signals have reached the other
visual areas responsible for telling you the 'what' and the 'where' of
that ball, it's probably more like 160--180 milliseconds. So if you are
reliant purely on the signals coming in, by the time you actively
perceive the ball in motion, it has already travelled several metres and
is about to fly past you. The third and final problem we have is the
intrinsic ambiguity of any sensory information. Imagine seeing a red car
not far in front of you. It would be safe to assume that it is indeed a
car, several metres away. But based solely upon in the visual image
falling on your retina, it could also be a small, model car just a few
centimetres from your face. These limitations of our nervous system ae
less obvious in day-to-day life. It is when we are faced with visual
illusions, those in the pages of textbooks or the drawings of M. C.
Escher, that some of these issues come to the fore. Take the simple
block pattern that can be perceived as two black faces gazing at each
other or a white vase; the line drawing of what appears to some to be a
duck's head, to others a rabbit; or the picture of an old lady that can
suddenly change into the side profile of a young girl. These are not

mere curiosities, but illustrate the ambiguity that our perceptions have
to deal with to make sense of the world.

Figure 3. An example of M. C. Escher's staircases, Ascending and
Descending (above), and the crone/girl illusion (below). Our brain
resolves visual ambiguity by making predictions based upon what we see,
related to our expectations. If you first see the crone, and finally
make out the girl, it is then difficult to see the crone again.

But some of these illusions also demonstrate something more fundamental
about ourselves. They give rise to the notion that the brain is not
simply an absorber of information. It is a prediction machine. Our
perception of the world is based upon predictions of how we expect our
world to be, a necessary shortcut to deal with those three flaws, of
data capacity, inherent delay and ambiguity. Let's go back to the
picture of the old crone in Figure 3--once you see the young woman
hiding within it, it is difficult to go back to seeing the old lady.
Then there is the illusion of a mask of a face constantly rotating
through 360 degrees -- as the mask turns and we see its reverse, a face
turned inside out, we still see a normal face. Our brains have spent
decades learning what faces look like; the noe and the chin being closer
to us than the lips or the eyes. We expect to see a normal face, we

predict a face to be there. Our perception is therefore what we know to
be a face, rather than the inversion that we should be seeing. Other
illusions even demonstrate how we use prediction to compensate for
living a few milliseconds in the past. This phenomenon can be
illustrated very clearly in the form of an animation called the
flash-lag illusion. A small bar rotates around an invisible centre
point, like the second hand of a clock, flashing on the screen at
predictable intervals, much like a stop--start animation giving the
perception of movement. If an additional bar is flashed alongside the
first bar, at the same angle, then the two bars look to be aligned as
they rotate around the central point. But if the second bar appears only
at unpredictable intervals, the two bars are perceived as misaligned, a
kink in the hand of the clock. The predictable nature of the movement of
the first bar means we are actually perceiving the bar to be where we
expect it to be, while the unpredictable flashes of the second bar mean
we can only see where it actually is, resulting in the two bars
appearing to be set at an angle to each other. Even on a cellular level,
we can see evidence of some of the solutions that evolution has
undertaken to deal with our flawed nature. The problem of bandwidth has
long been recognised in the electronic world. In the world of
television, one of the challeges has been to transmit the information
detailing every pixel on a screen. But it has been known for some time
that the colour of any pixel can often be predicted by the colour of the
pixels next to it. For example, if a blue sky is on the TV screen, the
likelihood is that one blue pixel is likely to be surrounded by other
blue pixels. This suggests that there is a degree of redundancy in this
information; that we do not necessarily need to transmit details of each
pixel twenty or fifty times per second. What is more important is
change; to communicate where the pixel colour has altered. This enables
significant compression of the data being transmitted, like the zipping
and unzipping of a large computer file sent by email, whereby redundant
information is excised. It is change that we are interested in from a
biological perspective, too. A static world around us is no threat, but
as we move through it, or as it moves around us, this is what influences
our survival -- to perceive food or water, or the lion about to pounce.
Our sensitivity to change is obvious in daily life, as is our ability to
adapt to it. The heart-stopping cold of jumping into a lake slowly
fades, and the stench of a room, apparent when we enter it, gradually

becomes imperceptible, only brought back to our attention when someone
else notices it. Thus, there is a clear evolutionary pressure to detect
shifts in our environment, but our nervous systems simply cannot sustain
the bandwidth necessary to convey every single sensory input to our
brains at every single moment. Evidence of the adaptation of our nervous
system to cope exists even at the most basic level. Returning to the
visual system, we know that the retina is chock-full of photoreceptors,
with some 120 million rds and 6-- 7 million cones per eye. But when the
photoreceptors are triggered, they do not transmit 250-odd million
signals to our visual cortex, otherwise system overload would ensue.
Instead, there is a class of cells in the retina called horizontal
cells, which link groups of photoreceptors together. One of the
functions of these cells is to detect relative signals from these groups
of photoreceptors, essentially cancelling out similar signals and
conveying messages to the brain only where there are differences between
various photoreceptors rather than absolute values. A simple example of
data compression. By this point, you may be wondering what relevance
this all has to Nina and other people with visual hallucinations. These
limitations within our nervous systems that I have set out are
essentially insoluble. Our brains are not limitless computers, able to
process and draw meaning from our environment at every single moment of
our lives. Shortcuts are necessary in order to facilitate our survival.
And this shortcut comes in the form of prediction. The concept that the
brain is a prediction machine, that our sensory inputs are interpreted
in the context of our predictions of the world, is now firmly rooted in
the wrld of cognitive and computational neuroscience. Within our brains,
we have a model of the world as we understand it, based upon our
previous experiences. For everyone on Earth this model is slightly
different, based upon our genetics, upbringing and life experiences to
date. The model is constantly being refined or adjusted, based upon the
experiences of the day. In fact, as I have written about before, in The
Nocturnal Brain, one hypothesis as to why we dream is that the act of
dreaming represents the refinement of our internal model, while we are
removed from our external world. A degree of prediction is vital to
enable us to deal with the constraints of bandwidth, delay and ambiguity
inherent to us. The predictive-coding model of our brains proposes that,
at

every level, there is a balance between incoming sensory inputs and this
predictive process, the 'bottom-up' signals of sensation and the
'top-down' predictive signals feeding back on each other. Originally
developed to explain aspects of vision, some theorise that this model
could be extended to even higher levels of cognition and perception,
inclding social interaction and belief systems. Getting the balance
right between the two streams of information running in opposite
directions is a tricky business. We want to use our predictions to
optimise our perception of the world, but if we over-rely on our
predictive nature, we run the risk of creating the world in the image of
our own expectations. If we over-rely on our sensory inputs, or
under-rely on our predictions, however, we risk either being drowned in
a sea of noise or being unable to overcome those limitations of our
brains and nerves that I have described above. The balance is crucial,
and it is at the crux of a unifying theory as to the nature of
hallucinations. In Nina's case, the lack of sensory signals due to her
blindness results in an over-dependence on her internal predictions, a
relative imbalance causing an overweighting of her predictive brain, a
perception of vision in the absence of seeing. There's a similar
explanation for those undergoing sensory deprivation. But for the
hallucinations of psychosis or underlying brain diseases such as
Alzheimer's or Parkinson's, the internal predictive nature of our brains
overrides those sensory inputs, also resulting in hallucinations. This
view may also explain delusions -- strongly held beliefs in the presence
of clear evidence to the contrary -- because the internal model of our
world extends to all aspects of our understanding of our environment,
not only our sensations. And this model of how we function may even
extend to other areas. For example, people with autism often report
'sensory overload', a feeling of discomfort or inability to cope with
too much sensory information, such as loud noises or a busy field of
vision. Perhaps the strength of their internal world is weaker, limiting
their ability to process sensory inputs. As I wrap up my conversation
wih Nina, I begin to properly absorb the story that she has just told
me. Now thirty-five years old, in the past three decades she has had
almost countless promises of improved vision

repeatedly dashed. Some of these incidents are more predictable -- the
rejection of any graft is a distinct possibility. But I cannot quite
comprehend the last two incidents. Both times, it seems like fate has
sought her out, accidents of infinitesimally small likelihood targeting
her better eye. Catastrophic events; destiny conspiring against her. I
ask her how she makes sense of all of this. She tells me she was never
really spiritual before, brought up a Catholic in name alone. But with
everything that has happened to her, she says, 'I honestly believe that
this is where I'm meant to be. Here, sharing my story with the world.
Creating an awareness. This is why I'm going through this journey, so
that other people can hear it and learn from it, and hopefully help
other people going through the same thing. It's got to be the reason for
it. I honestly, truly believe that the universe wants me to be in this
place.' Her growing spirituality has also resulted in a leaning towards
Buddhism and its principles. She has begun to meditate and has
undertaken a course in massage therapy, something she enjoys. But she
adds, 'When I'm massaging somebody, it's like I can see them. I know
this might sound crazy, but I don't know if it is my third eye. When I
am in contact with the other person, it is like I can physically see
them on the bed in front of me. And the hallucinations go.' Her son
enjoys having his feet massaged. Nina loves doing this, 'because it
means I can see that little bit of him.' I am ntrigued. I ask if she has
ever massaged his face, to 'see' him, having not seen his face for
several years, but she has not. She tells me, 'I don't want to be one of
those blind people that say, "Let me touch your face,"' but says she has
tried this once, with a friend. 'It sounds weird, but I could see the
shape of her face.' It is vision of a sort, not through her eyes but
through her fingertips. In an effort to seek answers, and possible
solutions, Nina has been put in touch with one of my colleagues, a world
authority on Charles Bonnet syndrome based at a sister hospital in south
London; it is in fact through him I have been put in contact with Nina.
My colleague has raised the possibility of treating Nina with medication
to dampen down her hallucinations. I have a final question for her. I
ask, if she could be rid of the hallucinations, would she take that
opportunity? She is uncertain. 'I ask myself that every day, especially
on the bad days. But then I think, when

they go, then what am I left with? Just darkness. At least now, I still
have something to see.' OceanofPDF.com

3 THE STENCH OF A ROSE

'Nothing revives the past so completely as a smell that was once
associated with it.' Vladimir Nabokov, Mary

The worst stench I have ever experienced is seared upon my memory, still
gently smouldering some twenty-five years later. I can smell it now as I
consider it. It was 1995 and my first month as a medical student on the
hospital wards. The preceding three years had been spent in lecture
theatres, tutorials, dissecting rooms and laboratories -- anywhere but
face-to-face with patients. Perhaps we were not trustworthy enough to
actually meet the general public, too ignorant to be let loose. Straight
out of the blocks, my first 'firm' -- the team of consulants and junior
doctors I was attached to -- was in vascular surgery. Fresh-faced, eager
to learn and excited to be meeting patients for the first time, I was
quickly disappointed to meet my mentors. The hospital that I was based
at was, at the time, still known to be a bastion of the medical
establishment -- old-fashioned, traditional and not very progressive.
The very essence of this was distilled i some of the consultant surgeons
on the firm, like Sir Lancelot Spratt from Doctor in the House but
without any obvious vestige of humour or humanity. Their teaching styles
were based on the established techniques of shouting, bullying and
humiliation, and this ethos percolated down the firm structure, with
registrars and house officers utilising similar teaching methodologies
on us lowly students. Vascular surgery is largely focused on the repair
of diseases of the veins and arteries: stripping out varicose veins at
one end of the spectrum, lifesaving repair of burst aneurysms of the
aorta (the main artery leaving the

heart) at the other. And it was old-school surgery -- blood spurting
across the operating theatre in time with the heartbeat, tourniquets,
amputations. In those days, before the widespread use of statins and
before the beneficial effects of these drugs became evident, vascular
disease caused by the furring up of the arteries was very common. The
vascular ward was full of people with severe diabetes or who were heavy
smokers, with clogged up arteries, leg ulcers and aneurysms. My first
ward-round, a teaching round comprising the registrar and six medical
students, was a tour through the ward visiting selected patients who
provided particular learning opportunities. We drifted round the
overheated ward, new starched white coats over our shirts and ties, and
at each patient the curtains would be pulled closed around us; seven
medics in white coats in a confined space, standing over the poor
patient as they were prodded and poked while we talked medicalese. The
registrar had an air of menace about him, enjoying the game of
intimidating these unknowing and inexperienced young students. As we
gathered around the last patient, even before the curtains were drawn
round a faint hum of faeces and decay thickened the air. In the centre
of the hospita bed lay a tiny sparrow of a woman, perhaps seventy years
old but looking over a hundred. Her face was wizened, she had deep
creases around her mouth and a waxy complexion. Her shock of white hair
was tinged yellow at the front by months, years, decades of tobacco
smoke, her teeth blackened, the index and middle fingers of her right
hand stained brown with tar. As she looked around at us, it was clear
from her bewildered expression that she was in the very latter stages of
dementia, uncomprehending of this strange medical world. Closing the
curtains around the bed, that previously faint hum grew into a strong
stench. Already overheated, the closeness of eight people confined in
that small space became almost unbearable. Without further ado, the
registrar, a strange little half-smile on his face, whipped back the
cotton sheet covering the poor woman, like a magician unveiling his
latest trick in the expectation of applause. But he, too, got rather
more than he bargained for. As the sheet came off, it exposed the
woman's gangrenous leg -- awaiting rescue or amputation -- rendered
black and purple, with sloughing green oozing from it, arterial disease
starving the leg of oxygen-carrying blood. This was his big reveal, an
effort to shock and revolt his charges -- certainly enough to

turn my stomach and those of my colleagues. But the unfortunate patient,
in her demented state, had also been doubly incontinent. The bedsheet,
her nightdress, her legs -- all were smeared in a thick layer of dark
faeces, and a puddle of urine had settled in the middle of the bed
between her legs. The odours combined -- human waste, infection, dead
and dying tissue -- filling our noses our mouths, percolating into our
clothes. It is the closest I have ever come to fainting on the wards. My
colleagues and I could not escape fast enough. Even now, as I write, I
can catch a dim sensory memory in the back of my throat. If I'm being
honest, I have an absolutely terrible autobiographical memory. A
frequent conversation with my wife will consist of her talking about a
social event we went to, a conversation we had, sometimes even a trip we
made. She will be able to recite, almost word for word, a conversation
from twenty years ago, while I will have virtually no memory of what she
is talking about. A short way into the conversation, I will have to
admit to not being able to remember. But that ward round, that patient,
that incident -- I remember every single aspect of it: the face of the
poor woman, the colour of the walls, the look on the faces of the other
students, the smirk of the registrar transforming into horror. But most
of all, that viscosity of foul air as it filled my nostrils, sank into
my lungs and infiltrated my head; that smell, that odour of death, that
disgust in the pit of my stomach. It is indelible, carved in stone.
Among all the senses, smell and taste are outliers, both in their nature
and in our understanding of them. At the most basic level, compared with
the other senses, we sample something very different about our
environment through our nose and mouth. Vision, hearing and touch
convert energy into experiences, be that electromagnetic radiation or
mechanical energy. Taste and smell, however, inform us of the chemical
milieu that bathes us, or that we ingest. They are the sampling of
molecules in the air that we breathe, or in the food that we eat -- a
primitive, primordial experience of the world, shared with even the
simplestof unicellular organisms, such as amoebae; an insight into the
chemical soup we inhabit, reliant on sensing tentacles reaching out into
the world, touching substances around us that might indicate food,
danger or a mate.

Unlike the other senses, taste and smell are less granular, less
informative about our environment, unable to easily localise, to
identify, the source of a smell or taste. While we have two nostrils
just as we have two eyes, two ears and two hands, the sensory organs
within our noses are barely able to discriminate where a smell is coming
from. We can move our noses into likely locations as we look for an
increasing intensity of smell, but this is very different from our acute
ability to see depth and distance, to locate the source of a sound, or
to feel intricate details with our fingertips. Similarly, taste floods
the mouth, but does not give us further refinement about its source. Our
understanding of these two senses has been hampered by a perceived lack
of relative importance, for life in general and also in the context of
clinical disorders. They are at the bottom of the football league of the
senses. Blindness, deafness or numbness have so much more of an
immediate impact on the functions of life, the fundamentals of living,
than loss of taste or smell. After all, is it the end of the world if we
can't taste an apple or smell a rose? But this alone is not responsible
for the relative paucity of knowledge of taste and smell. The scientific
study of these senses has been limited by something a little more
prosaic. We can easily quantify and qualify light, sound or objects we
touch, according to locaion, wavelength, frequency, intensity or
pressure. But how do we do this for odours or flavours? Even when it
comes to our language surrounding these senses, they are outliers. It is
almost as if no interpretation is needed, or indeed possible. We have
extensive vocabulary to describe sights, sounds and the feel of things,
but the range of language for smell and taste is limited to what other
things they smell or taste like. We describe smells in the context of
our experiences, memories poking up from the depths of our minds. We
express smells and tastes in terms of their meaning to us individually,
unable to break them down into their constituent parts. And this
highlights something extremely important. Remember Paul and his
inability to feel pain, or Nina and her vision in the absence of sight?
These disorders of the nervous system illustrate the schism between the
real world and how we experience it. While under normal circumstances,
that disconnect between the real world and our perception of it is much
more difficult to truly comprehend, when it comes to these two chemical
senses -- smell and taste -- the clash between the objective and
subjective is, for all of

us, more intuitive. What we see or what we hear is directly attributable
-- at least for the most part -- to the physics of our environment: the
fact that I can see an apple in front of me tells me that there is a red
sphere sitting on the desk a few feet away. But when it comes to smell
and taste, no one would argue that these senses tell us something
qualitative about the substances we are encountering. When we taste
vanilla ice cream, does that tell us about the specific chemical
structure of vanillin, the primay compound that gives it that particular
flavour? When we smell perfume, does our experience in any way relate to
the physical properties of the cocktail of airborne molecules entering
our noses? No -- our experiences of the ice cream or perfume are merely
shorthand, our understanding of our chemical environment reduced to a
taste or smell, a label given by the brain. If we are simply sampling
chemicals in the air or in our mouths, we might expect these senses to
at least tell us something vague about the molecular structures of these
chemicals. Indeed that is sometimes the case. Similar molecules may have
similar odours: all amines smell of something roasting, fatty acids
smell rancid, and aldehydes often smell of plants, like cut grass or
leaves. But this is definitely not always the case. Sometimes similar
molecules may smell totally different. Sometimes even the same molecule
may smell totally different when it has a different 3D structure
(so-called enantiomeric compounds), for example one version of a
particular molecule smelling of tropical fruit, the other version
smelling of rubber. Few examples demonstrate the illusory nature of our
chemical senses better than Synsepalum dulcificum, otherwise known as
the miracle-berry plant. Native to West Africa, this shrub grows a few
metres high and produces 2cm red fruit shaped a little like olives or
acorns -- so far, it may sound rather unassuming and not very
miraculous. But the miracle happens when you chew the flesh of the
berry. On its own, it is tangy and very mildly sweet, but nothing much
to write home about. But after you've eaten the berry, if you then bite
a lemonor a lime, even drink some vinegar, your mouth will be flooded
with sweetness, an explosion of the intense taste of sugar. The sweet
taste will linger for several minutes, until the active compound of the
berry, a substance known as miraculin, is washed away by your saliva. On
its own, miraculin does nothing. In the normal setting of the mouth,
with neutral saliva, the miraculin binds to sweet receptors and

simply blocks them, not really stimulating a sensation of sweet. But
when the mouth becomes acid, when saliva mixes with something sour, the
miraculin binds with salivary proteins and changes its structure,
suddenly making it able to trigger these sweet receptors rather than
blocking them. A rather remarkable illusion of taste, it is a potent
illustration of the loose nature of the relationship between the
physical world and our experience of it. 'I would have people make jokes
of it, just laugh at me, basically. I'd be sitting there with a
handkerchief over my nose, trying to stop any smells, trying to stop
breathing, really. I'd breathe through my mouth instead of my nose to
stop having to smell that smell, and people would just make fun of me. I
even had somebody say, "Well, at least you're not deaf or blind."' The
bitterness is evident in Joanne's voice as she tells me of her
experiences of the past five years -- bitterness at the lack of
recognition of the impact of her condition, bitterness at the
all-pervading effects of it. Joanne's problems started innocuously
enough. A simple head-cold, in her mid-forties, back in 2015; the kind
of cold that is familiar to anyone in the UK, an intermittent companion
of autumn, winter and, for that matter, spring. Joanne, based in the far
north-east, in Tyneside where the biting wind whips in off the North
Sea, would alo without doubt have been no stranger to a cold. But this
one lingered for weeks, causing some chronic sinus issues, and
ultimately Joanne needed a course of antibiotics to shift it. Her cold
settled and she thought nothing more of it -- until a few weeks later,
when she noticed something strange. 'I started to notice a really bad,
distorted smell. I couldn't put my finger on it. It could be between
rotting flesh or sewage. Really a foul, putrid smell.' As time went on,
Joanne found that this stench became all-pervasive, all-consuming. 'It
just got worse and worse. It was every second of the day.' But it was
not only her sense of smell that was affected. The reek of decay
permeated her food as well. 'Everything tasted either like a chemical
taste or as if it had gone off, as if it were mouldy or rotten.'
Specific smells seemed to heighten the unpleasantness, and the range of
triggers was not at all conducive to normal life. 'If I came in contact
with cigarette smoke, cooked food, coffee, even fabric softener or
perfumes, that

putrid smell was just heightened twenty-fold.' The smell of mint in
toothpaste induced gagging, leading her to seek out flavourless
toothpaste. Going into work, surrounded by the perfumes and aftershaves
of her colleagues, became intolerable. She went off sick for several
months. Even family life became fraught. A Sunday lunch with her partner
and her sister's family would become a trial. The smell of food, the
smoke of the coal fire, people's personal scents, all became quickly
overwhelming. 'So I just escaped outside. But you're surrounded by
smells outside as well. Just by going to the shops, you'll pass people
smoking a cigarette. I would run a mile in the opposite direction. Even
the smell of cut grass -- I couldn't stand it.' All this quickly took
its toll. Joanne found her new reality xtremely distressing. 'I just
wanted to sleep all the time, because that was my only escape. I wanted
to hibernate. I didn't want to go out, socialise, go to work. I
literally just wanted to sleep.' Like the miracle berry, Joanne's
sensory world had become illusory. The perpetual odour of death,
putrefaction, decay -- an illusion of smell, horrific rather than
miraculous. Joanne's distress was compounded by a lack of help or
understanding. Her first visit to her general practitioner was met with
a blank look. 'My GP hadn't heard of it at all,' Joanne recalls. She was
given various nasal sprays and medications, to no avail. I ask Joanne if
her family thought perhaps that the problem may be psychological -- I
have previously come across patients so depressed as to become
psychotic, and to have delusions of the world around them rotting or
dying. 'I think they understood it was biological, but they just didn't
know how to help.' As is so frequently the case, 'Dr Google' gave an
answer of sorts. It gave her condition a name. 'I had never heard of it,
and when I challenged my GP, they hadn't heard of it either.' That name
is parosmia. The simple act of inhaling. A slow, deep drawing in of
breath, with mouth closed. The subtle narrowing of the nostrils, the
vibration of turbulent air tickling the nose. An unconscious act, the
simple attendance to life itself -- yet simultaneously, and equally
unconsciously, an act of vigilance, of sampling the external world,
detecting danger, seeking food, family, a potential mate. The whole
world studied through a single breath. And

underlying this examination of the universe is the only point where the
central nervous system meets the outside world, where our brain reaches
out beyond the confines of our own bodies. When it comes to all our
other senses, the brain is guarded, with gatekeepers fronting a defence
like dooren to an exclusive club; peripheral nerves and sensory organs,
such as the ear or eyeball, keep the world at arm's length. But when it
comes to smell, our brain lets its guard down, its tentacles reaching
into external space, directly grasping at the air. At medical school,
among the first pieces of anatomy we learn about are the cranial nerves,
the twelve pairs of nerves emerging directly from the brain, innervating
various parts of the head, neck and trunk. They are responsible for head
sensation, eye movement, vision, even the function of the stomach. But
the first pair of these nerves, the olfactory nerves, are unlike all the
others. Like the optic nerves, they arise from the cerebrum itself, not
the brainstem, but unlike the optic nerves, almost all their path
remains within the cranium itself, and their fibres come into direct
contact with the exterior environment. Fibres of the olfactory nerves
float free in the mucosa of the nasal passages before piercing through
the colander-like cribriform plate of the skull, the bony structure
constituting the roof of the nasal passages. But the nerve itself
derives from the brain; it is basically the brain reaching outside the
skull into the world. The details of the olfactory nerve are staggering.
In each nostril, within the roof and septum of each passage, a small
area of mucosal tissue, only 2.5cm2 in area, is dedicated to smell.
Within this tiny area, the size of a postage stamp, are located some
6--10 million sensory neurones, each waiting to encounter chemicals
breathed in.

Figure 4. Above: cross-section of the nasal cavity. The olfactory
receptor neurones pierce the bony cribriform plate, then form the
olfactory bulb and transmit smell inputs to the brain via the olfactory
nerve. Below: viw of the olfactory nerve and the brain from beneath. The
olfactory nerve sits on the underside of the frontal lobe of the brain.
Other cranial nerves are visible, including the optic nerve (vision),
trigeminal nerve (facial sensation), and vestibulocochlear nerve
(hearing and balance).

Unlike many other parts of the nervous system, these olfactory neurones
are constantly regenerating, lasting on average a month or two before
being replaced by continuously replicating stem cells. However, exactly
how these millions of neurones -- like filtering sea anemones with arms
outstretched, waiting for the current to provide prey -- create a sense
of smell remained largely a mystery until just a few decades ago. In the
early 1990s, the Nobel prize-winning work by Linda Buck and Richard Axel

identified a large family of genes that are responsible for detecting
the volatile airborne chemicals dissolved in the lining of the mucosa --
otherwise known as olfactory receptor genes. In mice, there are some
1,100 different olfactory receptor genes, while we humans have a paltry
350--370. Each sensory neurone expresses only one type of olfactory
receptor gene, implying that each neurone detects only one chemical as a
scent. But if that is the case, then how can we detect almost countless
odours? Subsequent work has uncovered a rather complex picture -- a
process that enables us to distinguish thousands of smells using a
limited array of detectors. It is similar to the three colour-receptors
in our retinas that permit us to detect a rainbow of colours through
combining signals, but much more complicated. In contrast to the visual
system, which has only one sort of input -- light, albeit at various
different wavelengths -- the lfactory system has inputs in the form of
chemical structures, unrelated molecules of different shapes and sizes.
But rather than three types of detector, as with vision, the olfactory
system, with its heterogeneous inputs, needs hundreds. Yet ultimately,
there are parallels between the perception of colour from three
different light receptors and the abstraction of smell from 370
different olfactory receptors. While each individual sensory neurone
does indeed express only one type of chemical receptor, any one odorant
may stimulate several different receptors to a greater or lesser degree.
Furthermore, each receptor can detect several related molecules. In
essence, each chemical has its own signature, stimulating different
populations of neurones to different degrees. And it is the summation of
these signatures -- multiple volatile compounds comprising the scent of
a rose or the unpleasantness of soured milk -- that constitute our own
perception of smell. As we begin to understand the gulf between chemical
reality and our perception of our olfactory milieu (and the mechanisms
that underlie it), it becomes apparent what a precarious system this may
ultimately be. Firstly, there are the anatomical vulnerabilities. These
neurones are in direct contact with the outside world -- a very unusual
occurrence. They are therefore at high risk -- risk of damage from
infection, inflammation or trauma. A simple cold, inflammation of the
nasal passages, a blow to the nose -- all of these may result in killing
off these neurones. But their location in relation to other structures
in the skull makes them especially vulnerable to injury.

These nerve fibres must penetrate the skull, and do so via those small
perforations n the cribriform plate. Any trauma to the head can result
in small shifts in the internal organs of the skull, causing a shearing
of these neurones as they pass through the bone. In fact, about 7 per
cent of people with any head injury experience smell impairment, either
through damage to these fibres or to the brain's smell-areas themselves,
or through nasal injury blocking the passage of air to the olfactory
receptors. Secondly, since the entire system is based on each odorant
generating a unique pattern of stimulation, anything that upsets the
delicate balance between the inputs and outputs of the various receptors
and neurones may fundamentally alter this sense of smell. Depending on
the proportion of neurones damaged, and which particular ones are
affected, the result may be a mild, moderate or total loss of smell. But
it may also cause an alteration in smell, like Joanne's -- parosmia,
where the smell of everything is altered, where all is tainted by the
odour of something else. Once again, there are parallels with vision,
where the red, green and blue cone-receptors integrate wavelength
information to permit perception of colour; lose one type of receptor
and you become 'colour-blind' -- your world of colour takes on a new
hue. Most of us are aware of the genetic colour-blindness caused by an
absence of one type of receptor at birth. But if the nerve, or indeed
the retina, is damaged by something later on in life, for example
certain antibiotics used in the treatment of tuberculosis, this may
result in a similar phenomenon. I sometimes see patients wit seizures
arising from part of the brain near the primary olfactory cortex, where
smell is consciously experienced. In the prelude to their seizures,
during the aura, they will often notice an unpleasant smell, of burning
rubber or some other foul odour, as the uncontrolled electrical activity
stimulates these smell centres of the brain. Clearly, then, this sort of
phenomenon can arise from the brain itself, albeit very intermittently
in the context of seizures. But parosmia is almost always seen in
individuals whose sense of smell is already impaired more generally,
adding weight to the view that it is the destruction or disruption of
the olfactory neurones that lies at the heart of this condition, rather
than anything at the level of the cerebral cortex. The description of
the distortion of smell as being rotten, foul or sewage-like is almost
universal, and most say that particular smells like petrol, tobacco,
perfume or fruit tend to

trigger their parosmia. The underlying cause is most frequently a bad
cold, chronic sinus disease or head trauma, though it remains unknown in
up to a quarter of people. In many respects, Joanne is a textbook
parosmia sufferer. One other very significant feature of parosmia, and
of other disorders of smell or taste, is depression. More than 50 per
cent of sufferers experience depressive symptoms as a result. In that
respect, too, Joanne is no exception. While she does not state it
explicitly, as I talk to her it is clear that her condition has had a
massive effect on her mood. She readily admits to having wanted to do
nothing but sleep, an escape from the torture of decay pervading every
aspect of her waking life. 'You just can't even think about living a
life hen you're constantly smelling a putrid smell, tasting a putrid
taste,' she tells me. She couldn't work, couldn't socialise, could
scarcely bear to be in the same room as family members; the smells
associated with other people heightened the foetid smell eating away at
her, making life intolerable. But there were also other factors that
contributed to her general despair: the duration of time it took to get
a diagnosis, and the general lack of knowledge about her condition by
medics and others around her; the merry-go-round of treatments without
success; the anxiety caused not only by the parosmia, but also by the
loss of certain aspects of her sense of smell -- 'I couldn't detect gas
or smoke. I could smell something, but it just smelled the same as any
other smells. It was very worrying.' Even after she had been given a
diagnosis, there was the uncertainty of the future. She was informed
that there was no cure, and no one could tell her if her sense of smell
would ever normalise. 'I became very angry and reserved, and I just
didn't want to be around anybody,' she recalls. 'It's very difficult for
my family to understand what I was going through simply from my
description. It's really difficult for somebody not going through this
to understand it at all, what it must be like.' Eventually her GP
prescribed her a course of anti-depressants, but she remembers them
having virtually no impact. It is easy to understand why going through
what Joanne was experiencing may cause depression; to understand the
impact on family, social and working life, and on the desire to venture
outside -- in fact, to engage with the outside world at all. But there
may be something else going on. Perhaps there is an alternative
explanation for this mood disturbance, or at least another factor. As we
have already seen, smell is an outlier when it

comes to our enses. The pathways between its sense organs and our brains
are more direct, less filtered. There is no peripheral nerve component;
it is as if the brain itself is reaching out into our environment. For
the other senses, the pathways to the cerebral cortex are lengthier and
more convoluted, down nerves, through the spinal cord, through the
brainstem or via various relay stations, clusters of neurones termed
'nuclei'. In contrast, for smell, this is not the case at all. Nerve
fibres from the olfactory bulb -- the bit of the olfactory nerve
immediately above the cribriform plate -- project directly into the
olfactory cortex, the centre of our smell experience. But this primary
olfactory cortex is surprisingly widespread within the brain, and
consists not just of an area involved in the discrimination of smells,
but also regions of the limbic system, the areas of the brain involved
in processing emotion. It seems that these areas of the brain are
responsible for representing pleasurable or unpleasant responses to
smells; the amygdala, a key region of the limbic system, lights up on
brain scans when people are exposed to horrible smells. Beyond this
primary olfactory cortex, the smell-inputs then project more widely to
other areas of the brain. And when you look at which areas these are,
there is a striking overlap between the regions involved in olfaction
and those involved in depression. But these links between smell and mood
are not solely anatomical. There appears to be a reciprocal association
between smell and depression. People with clinical depression have
poorer smell function than control subjects, and those with poor smell
have symptoms of depression that worsen with the degree of smell
impairment. Indeed, the volue of tissue that constitutes the olfactory
bulb tends to be smaller in depressed patients. Even in animals, there
are strong links. If the olfactory bulb is damaged in rodents, this
results in chages to immunity, hormones and chemical levels similar to
those seen in depressed humans, with changes in the concentration of
dopamine and serotonin within the brain. The rodents' behaviour changes,
too -- again, more in keeping with depressive behaviour in humans. And
so it may be that, beyond the direct consequences of the parosmia on
Joanne's lifestyle, there may be more fundamental reasons as to why she
became angry, withdrawn and irritable; perhaps it is a direct effect on
her brain. But this strong relationship between smell and emotion raises
further questions: why should this relationship exist in the first
place?

I am drawn back to the stench of the ward over twenty-five years ago,
when the surgical registrar whipped back the patient's covers, revealing
rotting, purulent flesh, urine and faeces. It fills my nostrils even
now, and I can vividly remember the sudden sense of horror and revulsion
in the pit of my stomach. I can vividly see the poor woman's expression
as she looked at our faces, not understanding where she was, who we
were, and what we were all doing there. Her face, that foetidsmell,
those emotions: they are etched on my memory, unfaded by the passage of
time. While hopefully few readers will have encountered this specific
scenario, almost all of us will understand the central tenet of this
experience: a particular scent sparking the memory of an intense,
long-forgotten moment, an emotion or scene, the ability of an olfactory
trigger to draw us back to a specific time or place, often associated
with a particularly positive or negative emotion. The smell of a cake
baking in the oven, the perfume or aftershave of a long-lost love. Or,
as my wife recently found, on a tour of a prospective school for our
daughter, the smell of the school corridor so strongly evoked unpleasant
memories of her own school that she took an instant dislike to the one
we were visiting, instantly ruling it out. And then, of course, there is
Marcel Proust, who is quoted in almost every scientific article on this
subject: 'And suddenly the memory returns. The taste was that of the
little crumb of madeleine ... The sight of the little madeleine had
recalled nothing to my mind before I tasted it.' For Proust, it was the
flavour (not just smell) of the small cake that took him back to the
past. A less unpleasant example than my own. It is smell, then, more
than any other sense, that seems to be evocative of emotional states and
related events. While other stimuli, whether musical, tactile or verbal,
are as good at conjuring memories of events, those recollections
triggered by smells are consistently more emotional events. In fact,
experiments have shown that emotional state may actually strengthen the
link between smell and memory. In one experiment, pre-exam students were
given word-based memory tasks, some with an ambient smell andothers
without. Those accompanied by an odour did slightly better, but this
effect was strongest in those students who were highly anxious during
learning. So, it seems that not only is there an overlap between
olfaction and emotion, but also olfaction and emotional memory. Those
regions of the

brain involved in olfaction and emotional processing also have a strong
role in memory. The amygdala, with its direct inputs from the olfactory
nerve, is fundamental to the experience of fear and 'fear conditioning',
the process that pairs a previously neutral event (like the sound of a
car braking) with fear (in someone traumatised by a serious car crash).
This process may be deeply unhelpful in individuals with post-traumatic
stress disorder, in whom the smells of blood, petrol or, in the case of
Vietnam veterans, napalm, may precipitate a massively exaggerated
fear-response associated with awful memories. But this process may also
be crucial to survival. Consider a mouse's instinctive fear-response to
the smell of a cat; it would be potentially very useful to be fearful at
the smell of cat litter or cat food too. This sort of effect would also
be helpful for humans. Equally, the entorhinal cortex, another region
that constitutes the primary olfactory cortex, is closely linked to the
hippocampus, a region of the brain fundamental to new learning and
memory. A pleasure response to a particular smell may also be important
from an evolutionary perspective, causing organisms to seek out smells
that facilitate eating, safety or mating. This tendency for smell to
trigger memories may have some far-reaching implications. Studies have
shown that odour-induced positive-emotion memories have a beneficial
effect on the immune system and inflammation, as well as altering brain
activity beyond just he olfactory regions. The 'simple' act of
perceiving chemicals in the air -- the binding of molecules to the
chemical receptors in the olfactory epithelium -- underlies a
neurological and psychological system that has consequences for a
multitude of cognitive, behavioural and physical processes. Smell,
despite at its core representing a simple chemical detection system, is
anything but simple. Now, some five years after her parosmia devastated
her life, Joanne has made a significant recovery. 'I would say I am
about 80 per cent better. I don't smell a putrid smell any more. I don't
have normal smell; there is still a distortion there. I still don't like
a lot of perfumes.' Her path back to some semblance of smell normality
has been long and convoluted. She eventually found an ear, nose and
throat surgeon with a specialist interest in smell disorders, something
surprisingly difficult to find. She was given an experimental treatment,
a drug usually used in asthma, called theophylline.

The hypothesis is that this drug may boost factors in the nasal mucosa
that drive olfactory neurones to replicate, thus accelerating the normal
process of replacement of these cells. If the underlying cause of
Joanne's parosmia is the loss or damage to a sub-group of these
neurones, then promoting regrowth should indeed help. Whether through
coincidence, placebo or the direct effects of this drug, Joanne tells
me, 'I took \[this tablet and\] more or less within one or two weeks, it
suppressed that putrid smell.' Joanne also ended up taking gabapentin, a
drug initially designed for epilepsy but now used in a variety of
neurological contexts to dampen down neuronal activity. She says, 'The
combination got me to a much better place; to be able to cope with
things. I do understand that the olfactory bulb in your nose does
regenerate sometimes, so it could be that a combination of the two drugs
has helped to supress those smells until the olfactory bulb has
regenerated.' She has now been off both drugs for about a year. Her
initial fear of the parosmia returning as the drugs were withdrawn has
not been realised and she continues to make small improvements despite
being drug-free. She has already started a treatment called smell
retraining. A couple of times per day, she holds a series of
strong-smelling oils under her nose. The aim is to essentially retrain
the nervous system to smell again. How it works is unclear, but it is
presumed to stimulate growth of the olfactory receptor neurones, and may
cause the reorganisation of pathways within the olfactory bulb or even
the brain itself. 'I definitely do feel I'm making progress. When I was
first diagnosed, they said that if my sense of smell didn't come back
within six months, then it probably never would. However, it's taken
four years to get to where I am.' The rate of progress now is almost
imperceptible, and Joanne realises that it takes many months before she
notices any marked change. 'So I would say any improvements were
miniscule. You couldn't say a percentage every month or every couple of
months. It takes a long, long time before you can notice any change.
Before, I was being seen every three to six months, but now they've
agreed to see me in two years' time to see how I've progressed.'

At the start of this book, I asked you to play a game of sensory
rankings, to order the senses in terms of their importance to you and to
define those you would be most willing to sacrifice. My own league had
the chemical senses of smell and taste at the bottom -- ones I could
live without. But listeing to Joanne, it is readily apparent that what
at first appears to be a simple case of alteration in smell perception
has much wider implications. Smell is not simply the detection of
chemicals in our environment, but has a fundamental role in our mood and
our memory. It is not only a sense that informs us about our exterior
world, but also influences our internal world. And, as I will explain
later, smell has a crucial role in our very survival, influencing our
choice of food and selection of mate, and enabling our wordless
communication with others. Importantly, though, as with the other
senses, what we perceive through smell is nothing more than an illusion,
our brains and our bodies ascribing meaning to chemicals in the air.
Joanne and her parosmia, like the miracle berry, show how minor changes
in the functioning our of bodies, in disease or normal health
respectively, can so markedly alter our perception of reality. How we
perceive smells, and our emotional response to them, is driven entirely
by the need for survival. I think back to that elderly woman in her
hospital bed; that revolting odour, the air thick with death and decay,
bile at the back of my throat. If I were reliant on rotting tissue or
faeces for my survival, as a maggot or dung beetle, perhaps, that
thickness in the air would be as delightful and comforting as the smell
of baking bread, as sweet as a rose. OceanofPDF.com

4 ALL THE NICE GIRLS LOVE A SAILOR

'Then God said let there be sound and divided the silence wide enough
for music to be let in and it was a good groove' Camisha L. Jones, 'Ode
to My Hearing Aids'

As I stand there in the London mizle, that peculiar combination of mist
and drizzle, I think what a surreal experience this is. I am in a garden
in Hampstead, the gentle hum of the traffic in the distance. The garden
is somewhat overgrown, in a deliberate way, and by my feet is a small
pond full of frogspawn -- efforts to create a haven for wildlife,
balanced by some design touches that hint at eccentricity. There are
bird feeders all around, but also wonderful sculptural renditions of
birds and other creatures, and a small garden gnome hiding in the
undergrowth. And in the midst of the vegetation, on a small patch of
turf, stands Bill Oddie, hand cupped behind his ear, listening for
birdsong while intermittently tweeting -- literally, not on a phone.
Speaking of the garden, Bill says, 'We've been here for a long time.
I've completely changed the garden to something -- as my wife would put
it -- ludicrous.' Bill is probably my earliest memory of British
television. I remember being at a friend's house, having picked up
enough English to vaguely communicate. On the television in the
background I could see three men on a trandem (a three-seat bicycle) and
various stop--go animation-type sequences. My English wasn't good enough
to understand what was actually going on, but I remember my friend and
his mother laughing as The

Goodies played. But it is Bill's voice that I most recall from my
childhood: slightly raspy and high-pitched -- very distinctive; the
voice of some of the characters in Bananaman, a Saturday morning cartoon
familiar to the children of the 1980s. Later, I would occasionally hear
him on various comedy panel shows on BBC Radio 4, and in the past couple
of decades he has been ubiquitous as a presenter of natural history
programmes on television. He is probably Britain's most famous
birdwatcheror 'twitcher'. But right now, he is simulating the songs of
various birds in a suburban garden in north London, as I look to the
overcast sky. I close my eyes briefly, and it is as if I am listening to
the familiar voice on the airwaves. I need to remind myself what it is
that I am actually here for. At the rear of the house, overlooking
Bill's oasis of calm, is a conservatory. The room is full of musical
instruments, a large drum kit taking centre stage. Hanging off the
cymbals stand is a faded Goodies cap, the only visible marker of his
long and varied career. We sit on sofas as we chat, a series of birds
flitting in and out of the garden behind him. 'I've just gone down to
Specsavers,' his voice drops to a whisper, 'to try some new hearing
aids, because I can't hear properly any more.' For anyone, a
deterioration in their hearing is of significance, but for Bill it is
particularly relevant. 'My hearing is very important to me. As a
birdwatcher, you do more of your identification through hearing than you
do seeing. Any birdwatcher will tell you, you hear something and then:
"Hello, where's that?" And then you look for it. So hearing is
absolutely vital. And I had a reputation of having not excessively good,
but pretty good hearing.' The sound frequencies of the songs or calls of
different birds vary hugely, and Bill says he began to notice some
difficulties in hearing the higher-pitched calls of certain species.
'There are certain key birds that, as you grow older, you find yourself
saying, "I can't hear grasshopper warblers any more -- can you?" There's
a little club of us: "No, we can't hear those either."' Bill recalls one
specific moment of realisation that his hearing was waning. 'I live near
Parliament Hill. We were up thee with another couple of friends, and
there were little birds migrating -- a bird called a meadow pipit -- and
I could pick out their call a mile off, normally. But this awful moment
occurred when I could visually see a couple flying over and I said

to my friend, "Are they calling?" He said, "Yeah." And another one comes
over. "Is that calling?" "Yeah." And that was it. It was horrible. I
said, "Whoops, I can't hear meadow pipits anymore." Then I tested myself
on a few of the other high-pitched birdsongs -- sometimes in reality and
sometimes with recordings -- and I realized that it was the top
frequency that had disappeared.' Since that moment, some four or five
years ago, Bill has noted a gradual deterioration. Goldcrests, redwings,
other birds too: 'I just can't hear them any more.' And the effects have
now spread beyond his twitching. 'It is not terrible, although my wife
would say yes, it's awful. She gets so cross with me when she has to
repeat everything. It's a very damaging process, isn't it? Anyone who
has hearing loss: your partner will go barmy at some point.' He has also
noticed an ever-increasing challenge to make out speech in a crowd or at
a dinner table -- 'burbly, burbly', as he refers to it. Most of the
time, it is the clarity rather than the volume that he has trouble with.
'And sometimes -- she doesn't like to hear it -- but I can't always hear
my wife.' About two or three years ago, Bill decided that the time had
come for hearing aids. His first attempt to resolve the problem was only
somewhat successful. He found that the hearing aids helped a little, but
did not normalise his ability to hear birds or his wife. 'The hearing
aids were a sort of payment fo a Specsavers advert I did -- which I
wrote for them, actually; an early one, before "You should have gone to
Specsavers" -- that one. It was a nice little ad,' -- he digresses --
'quite a nice little film. It wasn't presented as an ad, just a bit of
promotion. I played the birdsong, and then played what I could hear and
what I couldn't hear.' This first experiment with hearing aids, however,
ended rather abruptly. 'I dropped them one day in a theatre -- not a
good place to drop your hearing aids, crawling around amongst everybody.
They were never to be seen again.' His recent trip back to Specsavers,
on the morning we meet, is an effort to try once more. He has ordered
some top-of-the-range replacement aids -- 'At the moment, I'm
contemplating a fairly large bill,' he chuckles. I glance over at the
sizeable drum kit taking pride of place in the room, with musical
instruments scattered all around. I ask him if they are all his. It
turns out that most of the collection is his daughter's, although the
drum kit belongs to him. 'I play it quite quietly, if at all. It's not a
loud noise, you know. I know a lot of musicians, and an awful lot of
them have hearing

problems, but then they used to have ten tons of equipment in their
earhole!' If asked to define sound, most of us would say it is a
pressure wave, a vibration, passing through the air to our ears. This is
of course correct, but the process of hearing that sound is something
entirely different. It is all too easy to envisage hearing as being akin
to recording a voice for a gramophone record, with the singer or speaker
shouting into the horn to make the needle cut the groove onto a master
rcord, or a microphone converting those vibrations into electrical
signals. But that is not what hearing is. Rather, when we listen, what
we hear is the result of the process of making sense of these pressure
waves all around us, ascribing meaning to these tremblings of molecules.
It is an early warning system, an awareness of what lies in wait
immediately beyond our bodies or outside our field of vision. It is also
an effective mode of communication. As the authors of the textbook
Auditory Neuroscience state, 'Every time you talk to someone, you are
effectively engaging in something that can only be described as
telepathic activity, as you are effectively "beaming your thoughts into
the other person's head," using as your medium a form of "invisible
vibrations".' At the core of this process of understanding our auditory
world is that the sound an object makes is a function of its physical
properties and location. When mechanical energy passes into any object,
it will vibrate, with the frequency dependent on its physical
characteristics such as its size, its stiffness, its shape. Many people
will be familiar with the pure tones played to us through headphones
during a hearing test -- a single tone, artificial, devoid of any
deviation in amplitude, frequency or harmonic, not decaying with time.
In the real world, however, all these features inform us about the
world; pure tones, meanwhile, are a unicorn, almost imaginary. Consider
perhaps the simplest of noise generators, such as a string on a guitar.
Depending on the thickness of the string, the material it is made of and
the tension it is under, when plucked it will vibrate at a particular
frequency, its 'resonant frequency'. But here is a reason why that
string does not sound like those pure tones on the headphones. The
string not only vibrates at its resonant frequency, but to some extent
will also vibrate at multiples of that

frequency. Therefore, rather than one single frequency, the vibrating
string will generate multiple frequencies -- all multiples of the
resonant frequency, termed 'harmonics'. It produces not a pure, single
tone, but a combination of tones. In addition, exactly where along the
string it is plucked will influence the relative amplitudes of each of
those frequencies, giving a slightly different sound. A string is a
one-dimensional object of course. Two- and threedimensional objects may
vibrate in more than one axis, and so may generate a number of different
resonant frequencies and harmonics. The clanging of a steel manhole
cover on the street sounds very different (and extremely displeasing)
compared with Eric Clapton's teasing of his guitar. So the frequency, or
frequencies, an object makes tells us something about its size, its
shape and its composition. But there is more information that can be
gleaned from sound. The vibrations an object makes eventually die down,
decaying into nothingness. This too is dependent on its composition.
Compare a steel bar with a plank of wood dropped onto a concrete floor.
Both will make a loud noise, but the ringing of steel will last several
seconds, the clatter of the plank only a brief moment. In wood, the
energy is dissipated much more quickly, the sound silencing rapidly,
while the steel continues to vibrate. The nature of an object is so
fundamental to the sound it makes that we can even distinguish between
the sound of hot and cold water being poured into a cup. As water heats,
its viscosity reduces, causing it to bubble more when poured, resulting
in a higherpitched sound. Try it at home, wih your eyes closed -- but
ask someone else to do the pouring! It is not just the source of the
sound itself that tells us what we're hearing. The environment, too, can
influence our perception of sound -- the reverberations of sound in an
empty room, with hard acoustic surfaces, versus a small furnished room,
with carpet on the floor, curtains on the windows: a form of sonar,
telling us almost as much about the passive world around us as the sound
source itself. Knowing what is making a sound is clearly important, but
so is knowing where it is coming from. In this respect, sound may be
more valuable than vision, which can only provide information if the
object of interest is directly in front of us and it is not pitch dark.
Understanding the location of a sound source may mean the difference
between life and death -- where a

predator is, where food, water or a potential mate may be found. There
are some important features that help. As sounds pass through air,
higher frequencies dissipate more quickly due to friction in the air,
while lower tones travel further. Stand next to a busy motorway and the
higher pitches of motorbikes and car engines will be easily heard, but a
mile away from the same road you may only hear a low-pitched rumble in
the distance. What we hear may therefore inform us about distance, but
how we hear is even more important when it comes to knowing where a
sound originates. Identifying the accurate location of a sound source
ultimately comes down to anatomy -- the shape and density of our heads,
the distance between our two ears, and even the shapes of our external
ears. The advantage of having two ears, set a small distance apart, with
the head in between, is that sounds will be heard differently in each
ear. A sound from the left will reach the left ear a fraction of a
second ealier than the right. The margins we are talking about are tiny,
a maximum of 700 microseconds, but our brains are sufficiently sensitive
to pick up the difference. And that sound from the left will also be
slightly louder in the left ear than the right, which will be sitting in
the acoustic shadow of the head. The difference in loudness or sound
level detected by each of the two ears will also depend on the
wavelength of the sound, as well as its interaction with the folds and
ridges of our external ear, providing further important data for our
brains to compute direction. What's more, our ears are asymmetrical in
every possible way, meaning that the quality of the sound changes subtly
depending on the angle at which the sound wave reaches our head. One can
now begin to appreciate that the act of hearing is very different from
simply capturing sound; it is highly complex, reliant on calculations
based upon tiny differences in timing, volume and tone, with a temporal
resolution that blows the other senses out of the water. A difference of
less than 700 microseconds is sufficient to inform us about the
direction of a sound -- roughly a hundred times quicker than the
interval between light hitting your retina and visual signals reaching
your brain. But there are two major logistical hurdles in this entire
process of converting sound into meaning. The first of these does not at
first glance appear to be a major one, but is not without its
challenges. It is the problem of converting the physical vibrations into
electrical impulses, the language of our nervous system. This involves
overcoming physical, anatomical and

computational obstacles. The sound we are exposed to range from almost
zero decibels to 120 decibels, the volume of really loud rock music.
When put in these terms, it doesn't seem a problem. But think of it in
terms of energy levels, and the loudest sound has 1,000 billion times
more energy than the quietest audible sound -- the equivalent of having
the same set of scales to weigh an ant and the mass of a planet. We also
need to be able to hear a wide spectrum of frequencies. For the human
ear, this ranges from 20 to 20,000 Hertz, meaning cycles per second, and
we need to be able to hear a multitude of frequencies simultaneously. A
further challenge is the transmission of sound into the depths of the
body. The body is of course liquid-filled, yet, for land animals at
least, sound transmits through air. For sound, crossing the barrier
between air and water is problematic because the energy required to
shift water is much greater than that required to shift air. Thus, a
sound wave propagated in air is simply too weak to cause similar-sized
vibrations in liquid, so when the sound reaches the boundary between air
and liquid, most of its energy will simply be reflected back. Even once
sound has been transmitted into the body, there is the issue of how to
convert sound into electrical signals interpretable by the brain. The
ear is Nature's engineering solution to all these problems. The ultimate
translator of mechanical energy to electrical is the cochlea, a
snail-shellshaped structure measuring about 9mm by 5mm, the tiny link
between us and the auditory world. It is essentially a coiled tube
filled with liquid, about 3.5cm in length if unfurled. Along its length
runs a membrane -- the basilar membrane --that is stiff and narrow at
one end, floppy and wide at the other. The precise structure of the
cochlear tube and the membrane within it gives it very specific physical
properties. Sounds conducted into the cochlea cause the basilar membrane
to vibrate, but the location where those vibrations are greatest is
exquisitely dependent on the sound frequency. High-pitched noises, like
the song of Bill's meadow pipits, vibrate the basilar membrane most
intensely when they are very close to the entry point of sound into the
cochlea. The low-pitched tones of rumbling traffic affect the basilar
membrane at the point furthest from the sound's point of entry. The
membrane is ultimately acting as a frequency analyser, with different
points of vibration matching to the frequencies heard.

But the membrane itself does not communicate information to the brain.
Those vibrations still represent mechanical rather than electrical
energy, and the work of transformation must still be done. Attached to
the membrane is a fragile structure called the Organ of Corti, within
which sit the even more delicate hair cells. Tiny fine strands, or
hairs, only 20 micrometres in length, project like fingers from these
cells, and when the basilar membrane vibrates, it is the deflection of
these hairs that enables them to identify both the amplitude and rhythm
of that vibration, precipitating an electric current, the start of the
electrical journey to the brain. So, we can start to see how the
structure of the ear addresses some of the challenges involved in
hearing when it comes to the analysis of frequencies and the conversion
of mechanical into electrical energy.But what about the issue of volume?
How is it that we can hear such a range of sound energies, from the drop
of a pin to a roaring jet engine? There is one mechanism that both
provides a degree of protection from very high sound energies and also
addresses another issue, that of sound crossing from air to liquid. That
mechanism is the middle ear, a seemingly unnecessarily complicated
series of three bones that bridge the gap between the eardrum and the
oval window, the entry point of sound to the cochlea. Of these, the
stapes, a stirrup-shaped structure, is the smallest bone in the body,
roughly 3mm in diameter and weighing in at 6 milligrams. In combination,
these three bones act like a hydraulic system, overcoming the issue of
sound transmission between air and fluid; sound pressure from the
relatively large eardrum is focused by these structures onto the much
smaller oval window. The bones themselves have some influence on our
hearing. As light as they are, they do have some inertia, which prevents
them from efficiently transmitting high frequencies, thus influencing
our range of hearing. In fact, species sensitive to very high
frequencies, like bats, have even tinier middle-ear bones to facilitate
transmission of these ultrasonic energies. The exceptions to this
association between middle ear bone size and hearing high-pitched noises
are aquatic mammals, like dolphins, who famously generate highfrequency
clicks and other sounds to echo-locate and communicate. They, of course,
do not need to worry about the problem of getting sound from air to
liquid, and actually transmit sounds from the sea that bathes them into
the inner ear through their lower jaws.

The complexity of this air--liquid bridge, these three bones ratherthan
one, permits some degree of control over incoming sound transmission. A
tiny 6mm-long muscle, called the stapedius, attaches to the stapes and
acts like the dampener on a car's suspension. When contracting, it
limits the movement of the stapes against the cochlea, dampening loud
noises and preventing damage to the fragile structures of the inner ear.
We are not aware of the action of this muscle, although occasionally we
see the impact of its failure. One of the more common neurological
conditions is Bell's palsy, damage to the facial nerve resulting in
weakness of one half of the face. But within the facial nerve are
carried a few nerve fibres that supply this miniscule muscle, and when
the nerve is damaged, people affected often note that loud sounds seem
even louder, occasionally unbearable. The stapedius muscle is not under
conscious control, however, and is contracted by a reflex in response to
very loud sounds, or when we are talking. But this reflex cannot keep up
with crashes, gunshots or other loud noises out of the blue; repeated
exposure to these sudden explosions of sound energy are difficult for
the ear to defend itself from, so they are much more likely to cause
damage. In addition to the stapedius, the ear has an alternative method
for dealing with the massive range of volumes it encounters. Some of the
hair cells perched on the basilar membrane have the ability to amplify
sounds. These hair cells, called outer hair cells, possess an
extraordinary property. Their outer linings -- their cell membranes --
contain a protein called prestin. Prestin acts like a subcellular motor,
causing the hairs on the cells to move. When stimulated by sounds, the
prestin causes the hairs to intensify their movement, exaggeratng their
deflections and amplifying the ability of these cells to detect even
tiny amounts of energy -- the rustle of a leaf, an exhalation of breath.
But this super-sense comes at a cost. These outer hair cells are easily
damaged, and their injury can result in severe hearing loss. Despite the
protection that the stapedius affords, repeated sudden loud noises
cannot be compensated for, hence the hearing loss that afflicts so many
of the musicians that Bill knows. Despite the drum kit taking pride of
place in the room that Bill and I sit in, his hearing loss is not likely
to be a direct result of noise damage alone. Now seventy-eight years
old, he suffers the hearing loss that affects so many of us as we get
older. In fact, presbyacusis -- age-related hearing loss

-- is so common that it is almost a guaranteed aspect of ageing. By some
estimates, 100 per cent of people over the age of eighty will have
significant hearing loss. Even beyond the age of fifty, some 40 per cent
suffer from it. Twice as common as cardiovascular disease and five times
more common than diabetes, hearing loss constitutes one of the most
familiar problems of ageing. Many factors contribute to this
diminishment of hearing. The outer hair cells that are so vulnerable to
noise-related damage are lost with age, making the combination of age
and exposure to loud noises a particularly unhealthy one. Genetics, ear
disease, and exposure to drugs that damage hearing all contribute too.
The nature of the hearing loss is especially cruel. Presbyacusis leads
to the loss of high frequencies in particular, resulting in increasing
difficulty in discriminating speech, or, in Bill's case, the
high-pitched songs of his beloved birds. This loss of higher frequencies
makes hearing consonants especially problematic, transforming clear
speech ito mumbling. Its impact on speech discrimination can have
devastating consequences, with increased listening effort and hampered
communication driving avoidance of social interaction and exacerbating
loneliness. This process is caused not just by damage to the hair cells
in the cochlea. As we age, all sections of the auditory system suffer.
The structure of the cochlea itself shows evidence of ageing, as do the
nerve fibres that transmit the electrical impulses from ear to brain.
Even the areas of the brain responsible for perception of sound and
speech show changes, both in terms of structure and function. The
brain's ability to focus attention on the elements of noise we want to
hear, and block out those aspects we do not, also deteriorates, the
process of picking out a conversation in a noisy room being reliant not
only on the ear but on the brain too. Whether these changes in the
auditory cortex are as a consequence of reduced inputs from the ear, or
part of the ageing process simultaneously affecting the ear and brain,
remains to be clarified. But what has become clear in recent years is
the association between age-related hearing loss and more widespread
brain changes, in the form of cognitive impairment, and it is not
necessarily just the auditory cortex that is affected. Large studies
have shown that this hearing loss is associated with dementia, and the
worse the hearing loss, the higher the risk of cognitive decline. That
is not to say that hearing loss causes Alzheimer's disease, nor that if
your hearing is poor,

you will get dementia. It is entirely possible that dementia and hearing
loss go hand in hand due to a common underlying cause, or, as another
hypothesis proposes, that the efforts of trying to hear with imperfect
ears diverts brain resources from other areas of cognition. But one
particular theory is aining traction in the scientific world: that
sensory deprivation not only causes reallocation of cognitive resources,
but also drives decreased socialisation, reduced communication, and
depression, all of which contribute to cognitive decline. That wonderful
telepathy -- '"beaming your thoughts into the other person's head" using
as your medium a form of "invisible vibrations"' -- is at the core of
our connection to our partners, our families, our colleagues, our
society. Connecting with others is at the heart of what makes us human.
When hearing is lost -- that ability to express or hear our inner
thoughts, feelings, desires and viewpoints -- it also results in the
loss of place, loss of connection, and maybe ultimately the loss of
self. 1996, autumn. As I strode alongside my consultant through the
walkways of the Stonebridge Estate in north-west London, I was beginning
to regret my choice of clothing. I was wearing the uniform of the male
medical student -- shirt, tie and chinos, armour in the constant battle
that medical students fight in order to assume a degree of gravitas,
clawing desperately for a semblance of professionalism on the wards. A
jacket or blazer would be perceived as too much, presumptuous, and would
be reserved for junior doctors about to become consultants. Here, among
the decaying 1960s highrises in a housing estate with a reputation for
crack cocaine, gang violence and shootings, I realised my mistake -- my
choice of tie, in particular. A gift from someone, the tie's design
featured a bookcase of leatherbound books, and what I had previously
considered a learned look now felt like impending victimhood. My
psychiatrist boss had taken a different approach, his dark suit hidden
under a rumpled mac. His absence of a tie, I later learned, was in
response to having been strangled by couple of patients in the past. As
we stepped into a cramped steel coffin of a lift, smelling strongly of
urine, I felt a wave of relief that we were no longer quite so exposed.
Somewhere several floors above, we came out into an open passageway and
made our way to one of the flats, identical but for the front doors, in
different colours and varying degrees of disrepair. My boss

knocked on the peeling door, and after what felt like an age, I heard a
chain being drawn and the door being unlocked. It was my first week
attached to psychiatry, and the previous few days had been confined to
the lecture theatre. We had learned about the various aspects of taking
a psychiatric history, how to assess for risk of suicide, what
constitutes psychosis and neurosis. But to date, I had yet to meet a
patient. My consultant, a community psychiatrist, had brought me along
to undertake a home visit to one of his patients, a woman in her forties
with chronic schizophrenia. As the door opened, I could see a dark
corridor -- and a face. The woman peered out at us, saw her doctor,
barely glanced at me, and turned round, leaving the door open behind
her. I could immediately see the impact of her treatment. Her gait was
slow, with limited swinging of the arms, and every movement was
restricted, at a snail's pace. When we eventually sat in her living
room, which smelled strongly of cigarette smoke with damp mould
undertones, I could see her blinking sluggishly and infrequently, a
paucity of facial expression. Even her speech, as she greeted her
consultant but deliberately ignored me, was like a 45rpm single played
at 33rpm speed. All this, the mark of years of antipsychotic treatment,
producing Parkinson'sdisease-like side effects. She sat in a worn
armchair, the armrests blackened by years of dirt, the detritus of a
difficult and chaotic life around her. On the floor, next to her, was an
overflowing ashtray, the carpet around it pockmarked with burns from
misplaced cigarette butts. My consultant sat on a small sofa immediately
opposite her. Once again I was envious of his old coat, shielding his
clothes from the unspecified stains of varying colours decorating the
furniture like a Jackson Pollock painting. I perched delicately on the
other end of the sofa, trying to avoid too much contact with the seating
and any eye contact with the woman. I sat in silence, nodding briefly as
I was introduced to her. The consultation started, my consultant gently
enquiring as to how the woman was. With each question, a small delay,
and then a brief and slow response. She spoke quietly and hesitantly,
and I strained to hear her words. I relaxed a little as I realised that
this was not so different from other consultations I had sat in on.
Lulled by the gentle exchange between them both, my mind began to drift
as I looked around the flat -- but my attention was suddenly brought
back into focus when the woman let out a dramatic

shriek, then a shout of 'Medical student, don't do that!' I could feel
my heart racing, and colour rising to my cheeks, but when I looked at
the psychiatrist, he had not flinched or given any outward indication
that she had said anything untoward. Their conversation continued as
before, in hushed tones, no evidence that it had been punctuated by her
outburst. But a few moments later, again, a shout of 'No, no, no,
medical student! Dont do that!' And as the minutes passed, her outbursts
increased in frequency: 'Don't say that, medical student!', 'No, I
won't, medical student!', 'Why are you saying that, medical student!' As
I sat there, silently observing, she said she could hear me encouraging
her to harm herself, stab herself, hang herself. Needless to say, the
visit did not last much longer. I still hear the accusatory, hurt tone
in her voice now -- 'Medical student!' The bookshelf tie died that day,
but my fascination (combined with dread) for psychiatry was born: the
nature of the human mind, the breadth of human experiences, but also the
horror of psychiatric conditions and the fine line between sanity and
'insanity'. It is perhaps the evidence of an immature mind, but
throughout my psychiatry placement I could not shake the feeling that
there is blurring between the margins of normality and psychiatric
illness, a deeply unsettling thought. That incident ('Medical student!')
was my first encounter with auditory hallucinations -- the woman hearing
my voice telling her to kill herself. Of course, everyone will be
familiar with the concept of imaginary voices -- hallucinations of
speech as a manifestation of mental illness, just like the visual
hallucinations of psychosis discussed in the previous chapter. Before
the advent of mobile phones and earphones, the sole man wandering down
the street in loud conversation with himself was a marker of psychiatric
disease. But auditory hallucinations are not always a manifestation of
mental illness. Indeed, almost all of us will have had auditory
hallucinations, albeit of a less dramatic nature. We hallucinate every
night, in dreams of speech or music; more obviously, the ringing in the
ears after a few hours at a nightclub or concert, or the buzzing
accompanying an ear infection. These both meet the definition of a
hallucination: the apparent perceptionof something not present. More
specifically, these latter experiences represent tinnitus, derived from
the Latin verb tinnire (to ring) -- a hallucination, the perception of a
ringing, buzzing or hissing, in the absence of a real sound in the
outside world. Even beyond the temporary

phenomenon induced by a wild night out, tinnitus is incredibly common.
It is estimated to affect some 10--15 per cent of adults, more so with
increasing age. This correlation with older age is not surprising, given
the strong association between ageing and hearing loss, but hearing loss
is not a prerequisite for the condition. Some people with severe
tinnitus may have normal hearing, while many people with profound
hearing loss do not experience tinnitus. Other factors that correlate
with tinnitus include damage from persistent noise exposure or drugs,
and disorders that may influence nerve function. But why should damage
to the hearing apparatus, be it the middle ear, the cochlea or the
vestibulocochlear nerve -- the nerve that carries the electrical
impulses from the ear to the brainstem -- cause a gain of hearing, as
well as a loss? Well, we have already seen one mechanism that amplifies
very quiet sounds -- those outer hair cells in the cochlea, with their
molecular motors. But these are not the only way the auditory system
amplifies sounds. It appears that there are mechanisms in the brain,
too, that become active in the face of quiet or silence, increasing the
sensitivity of auditory cells in the auditory cortex to such an extent
that they perceive sound that is not actually there. It is this
increased sensitivity of the auditory cortex that is thought to underlie
tinnitus. Rewiring of the auditory centres of the brain, so-called
'plasticity', may be th true basis of chronic tinnitus. So, while the
initial origin of tinnitus may be damage to the inner ear or nerve,
tinnitus itself is a product of the brain; if you cut the
vestibulocochlear nerve of someone who has tinnitus, their auditory
hallucination will persist, even without any inputs at all from the ear.
There are clear parallels here with Nina and her visual hallucinations
of colours and shapes following her loss of vision. The brain wants to
be able to hear as much as it wants to be able to see, and when deprived
of visual or sound inputs, it will create its own visual or auditory
world. Bill Oddie's loss of hearing has also been balanced by a gain, as
with Nina's vision, but Bill's compensation is not tinnitus. His
condition is rather more unusual. It started rather suddenly, about two
or three years ago. 'I was in the house, as we are now,' he says, 'and I
just thought, Oh, somebody's playing music very loudly next door. It
sounded like someone playing a

record or radio. So I went over to the wall, just curious to see what
they're playing. And I thought, That's strange. It's not quite the same
\[music\] here. I moved round different parts of the house, and
discovered similar music going on.' For weeks, Bill continued to move to
different rooms and corners of the house, trying to pinpoint the source
of the music. 'I kept going up to my wife, saying, "Did you put the raio
on at four in the morning?" And she'd say, "Of course I didn't,"' he
chuckles. 'I think my wife got fed up with me saying, "Did you hear
somebody playing radio last night?"' I ask him if he recognised it as a
hallucination fairly quickly, but he tells me he thinks he was initially
in denial. That was, however, just the start of the musical
accompaniment to Bill's life. Since then, he has acquired a soundtrack
that follows him almost everywhere. It's more noticeable with silence
and solitude, but often present in the background the rest of the time
too. I ask him what kind of music it is. Bill reports it as being a
rather particular sound: a hint of brass-band-type music. He says
there's nearly always a lead trumpet playing a high note -- 'which
happens to be one of the sounds that I really dislike.' But while he
describes a consistency to the presence and tone of the music, there is
an indistinct flavour to what he is hearing, and he thinks that his
perception of what the music represents has shifted with time. Sometimes
he questions whether he is actually able to make out a clear tune. Over
the past year or two, he has rarely experienced purely instrumental
music. 'There are almost always singers, always a male voice, or a
relatively small male-voice choir; very occasionally a female voice, or
another voice that I'm picking up, like an announcer. It sounds like
someone playing a radio, but it's an old-fashioned style.' And as time
has passed, he has also begun to recognise the repertoire -- 'sort of
rollicking. Wonderful country songs from after the First World War.' All
of a sudden, Bill bursts into song, a few bars of 'All the Nice Girls
Love a Sailor' in his own distinctive voice, and once again I eel like I
am listening to a Radio 4 comedy panel show. He goes on to describe a
jukebox selection of songs -- 'Only, I can't choose them!' -- singing
snatches of 'Daisy, Daisy', 'Blaydon Races', 'She'll Be Coming Round the
Mountain', 'Rule Britannia' and the national anthem. 'I was hoping to
recognise something more modern. Something more up to date. I suppose
that disappoints me. It doesn't make any sense to me -- why the music is
from a particular era.' He would prefer

an internal Alexa -- 'one of those things you shout at' -- and would opt
for jazz, jazz-rock or Americana. I ask Bill if the musical
hallucinations are getting worse or if they ever stop him doing
anything. 'I don't think they are getting worse,' he says, 'but I think
I'm getting more annoyed with them. If I'm up in my office and I hear
it, it can go on a bit. Once or twice, I have been known to say "Shut
up!"' he laughs. 'Generally, though, it is not affecting my life,
really.' I wonder if it ever completely goes away. 'Oh, it's not there
now. It was here half an hour ago, before you came. It knew you were
coming,' he snorts. '"Lads, tea break's over!" I haven't lost a certain
sense of humour about it. I would if it was driving me nuts.' I am
hesitant to ask the next question. Bill has been on record over the
years talking about his struggles with depression and bipolar disorder
in his life, and I ask him if he thought he might be going mad when the
hallucinations started. 'No,' he chuckles. 'I've already been mad! I'd
already had one or two genuine supposedly bipolar experiences. But this
was different. I wasn't particularly depressed. I was just, "Where the
hell is that coming from?" It was straight out of the blue.' When he
realised what the music was, he went to the internet and ordered some
books. 'I found thisone by some American guy...' I tell him that the
book, Hallucinations, was by a north London boy who moved to the US.
Oliver Sacks grew up a couple of miles away, in Mapesbury Road, Kilburn.
As a child, Sacks would swim with his father in Hampstead swimming
ponds, a stone's throw from Bill's house. 'Yes, that's him! What did
strike me was that there seemed to be not much consistency about things
-- you know, that some people heard choruses and choirs, some people
heard some other type of music, some people just heard horrible noises
and so on.' Bill's soundtrack is a hallucination, and it is
intrinsically different from the hallucinations of psychiatric disease,
like those of the patient I visited as a medical student, sitting in her
armchair, shouting 'Medical student! Don't do that!' While the
hallucinations sound real to Bill, like music playing next door, he
knows they are hallucinations. His grasp on reality remains firm. The
singing and trumpet playing is more akin to tinnitus; he has the
perception of sound in the absence of an external stimulus, but rather
than hearing a ringing, buzzing or whooshing, it is more complex, more

nuanced, more melodic. While thought to be rare, this is perhaps an
underestimate: a recent study of people attending a hearing clinic found
that over 5 per cent of patients reported hearing music. Perhaps people
are disinclined to report these symptoms for fear of being thought
'crazy'. Bill's musical experiences are really rather typical, with
people describing bigband music, church choral music, trumpets or
bugles, occasionally even elevator or country music. As time passes,
however, many patients report that the music tends to fragment, with
shorter and shorter melodies being heard. And while musical
hallucinations are seen in individuals with psychiatric disorders r with
neurological diseases such as dementia, seizures, brain infections or
tumours, it is also seen in entirely healthy individuals. The most
common factor is hearing impairment, although even that isn't always the
case. Not surprisingly, when it comes to those patients with
neurological disorders, many of these relate to damage to the auditory
centres of the brain. Indeed, there are specific areas of the brain that
seem to encode music. Wilder Penfield was an American--Canadian
neurosurgeon who would electrically stimulate the brains of awake
patients before removing areas of the brain substance, to understand if
the regions he was about to remove served an important purpose. Through
stimulating either the left or right superior temporal lobe, Penfield
induced musical hallucinations in eleven of his patients, eliciting
Christmas carols, radio-programme theme tunes, a piano and an orchestra.
Once again, there are very clear parallels with Nina and her Charles
Bonnet syndrome -- visual hallucinations in the context of eye disease.
Tinnitus is the equivalent of the simple shapes or colours Nina saw,
while Bill's jaunty tunes from between the wars correspond to more
complex visual phenomena akin to Nina's zombie faces or the classic
Lilliputian figures described by Charles Bonnet himself. Presumably, the
nature of auditory hallucinations -- whether they're simple or complex
-- depends on the specific areas of the auditory regions of the brain
that show increased activity, usually in response to changes within the
ear itself. As with vision, there is a unifying theory as to how these
sound phenomena may arise -- musical hallucinations, tinnitus and the
hallucinations associated with psychosis ('Medical student! Don't do
that!'). This model of the brain is one that bidges the gap between

neurology and psychiatry, providing a plausible biological explanation
for mental illness. The theory is one we have touched on before -- that
the brain is ultimately a prediction machine, taking inputs from its
environment but also sending outputs down to its information-gathering
apparatus. Our brains do not have the capacity to recreate our
environment from scratch at every single moment of the day. Instead, we
predict the most plausible explanation for what we perceive to be
happening, based on an internal model of our world as we understand it.
When balanced, streams of information from the outside in (raw sensory
information) and from the inside out (our expectations) allow our senses
to work perfectly. Occasionally, of course, something unexpected will
happen. Our predictions, our expectations, will be incorrect, and we
will learn from these moments. But when the system is out of kilter,
when either the inputs are too limited, as in hearing loss, or when the
outputs of our brain -- those predictive models of the world -- are too
intense, as in psychosis, this results in hallucinations or delusions.
If your brain is so certain of its predictions that itignores sensory
information coming in, it may hold false beliefs or experience false
perceptions. Those very mechanisms that are designed to allow us to
better understand our world ultimately end up confusing our sense of
reality rather than clarifying it. In fact, this view of how our brain
works, and how we perceive, is having some surprising outcomes. Drugs
like ketamine, psilocybin (the active ingredient of magic mushrooms) and
LSD have long been used and abused due to their mind-altering
consequences. The changes to perception that 'trips' on these drugs
entail can also be understood in terms of alterations of prediction.
Consider someone on a 'trip' staring at a house plant, the fronds of
green slowly morphing into writhing snakes, then rivers of green, then
back to a house plant. It seems that these drugs exert their effects
through removing the predictive constraints of our daily life, leaving
us free to consider other possibilities, other interpretations of our
sensory data. In essence, what these drugs are thought to do is to alter
that balance between inputs and predictions, promoting chemicl changes
in the brain that free us up to perceive in a less rigid way. This model
of our minds introduces possibilities for the use of these kinds of
drugs in the treatment of mental illness. These drugs create the
opportunity for us to perceive situations in different ways. For
example, your anxiety may be rooted in

rigidly predicting what will happen tomorrow, next week or next year.
Your depression may have a basis in overly rigid predictions about your
own self. Allowing you to consider different predictions and different
realities may provide the opportunity for change. Indeed, evidence is
now emerging to support the use of these drugs in the treatment of
depression, and a ketamine-based nasal spray has been brought to market
for treatmentresistant depression. Once again, we are left with the
knowledge that, as with our other senses, reality and perception are two
very different things. The mechanical energy passing through the air
that is sound is something tangible, measurable, real. Its relationship
with what we perceive, what we actually hear, is much more complex. As
we have seen, that relationship depends upon our ears, upon our brains,
and can be fundamentally altered by damage or disease. It is even
modulated by normal ageing. And our expectation of our world, our
prediction of what we should be hearing, is occasionally a stronger
determinant of what we hear than sound itself, as with Bill Oddie's
musical hallucinations, the tinnitus that we may hear or even the
experience of being sure we have heard the doorbell or the mobile phone
ringing when we are waiting for a delivery or an important call. And if
this all sounds somewhat implausible, running counter to your view, I
urge you to view a simple video that is freey available on the internet.
Search for 'the McGurk effect'. You will be met by a video of a person
repeating 'Bah, bah, bah' over and over. At a certain point, the person
will begin to say 'Fah, fah, fah', the movements of their lips changing
in synchrony as they enunciate a different consonant. But close your
eyes and immediately you will realise than the soundtrack is still 'Bah,
bah, bah'. Open your eyes again, and you will again hear 'Fah, fah, fah'
as you watch the person's lips move. What is playing from your laptop's
speakers is completely unchanged throughout; only the video changes. The
expectation of what we hear, suggested by our vision, directly
influences what we actually hear. No matter how many times I watch this
video, I am always just a little shocked; surprised that my own senses
are so suggestible, so flawed and fallible (and, in truth, they're
likely to become more so as I get older). To hear it with my own ears is
usually to be convinced of reality, but perhaps we all have a misplaced
faith in our own experiences.

Postscript: I contacted Bill to ensure all was correct in this chapter.
His email starts in his familiar style: 'D ear -- accidental but
appropriate mistype -- Guy'. He tells me of his unpleasant experiences
of 2020 and the pandemic, then continues: A final comment may be in
order. So ... Well, the male-voice choir are still going strong. The
lyrics are less clear and the melodies less familiar, but the overall
style is consistent. As well as the vocals, I get 'riffs' played by what
sounds like a kazoo, or even a 'Stylophone', as pioneered by Rolf
Harris. Years ago! Surely not! I remain both surprised and narked that
what I hear is NEVER like music I have listened to or enjoyed. Who or
what is selecting the repertoire?! I need a new cranial DJ please. Oh
no, NOT 'Land of Hope and Glory' agan. Is there a cure? OceanofPDF.com

5 IN THE KINGDOM OF THE BLIND

'I don't think it had ever before occurred to me that man's supremacy is
not primarily due to his brain, as most of the books would have one
think. It is due to the brain's capacity to make use of the information
conveyed to it by a narrow band of visible light rays. His civilization,
all that he had achieved or might achieve, hung upon his ability to
perceive that range of vibrations from red to violet. Without that, he
was lost.' John Wyndham, The Day of the Triffids

There are patients in one's medical career that stand out in sharp
relief from the constant never-ending stream of humanity -- and its
ailments -- that flows through the doors of the hospitals I work at. I
would love to tell you that they are all people for whom a heroic
neurologist has snatched victory from the jaws of diagnostic defeat.
Where the (usually bespectacled, and slightly nerdy) protagonist strides
onto the ward clutching his trusted tendon hammer, briefly casting his
eye over the despondent patient languishing in bed, before pulling out a
rare diagnosis in a jaw-dropping display of logic, intellect and
expertise. There is a quick course of treatment, then resurrection, a
Lazarus-like recovery resulting in a previously bed-ridden invalid
striding out of the ward. Unfortunately, this type of story occurs very
infrequently. But there are countless others who stick in my mind for
other reasons -- disasters, demise, horror. The young Japanese girl, a
tourist in London, admitted with acute abdominal pain on my first-ever
night shift, whose belly I saw rapidly expand as she bled out into her
abdominal cavity from a rare tumour. The man in his sixties I was called
to see in the middle of the night, as a general medical registrar, who
was admitted wit chest pain thought to be cardiac in origin. He
proceeded to vomit litres and litres of bright-red fresh blood,

necessitating transfusion of massive amounts of fluids, plasma and red
blood cells, with me standing by the bed squeezing the bags of blood to
push it into his veins more quickly, all the while dodging the jets of
scarlet projectile vomit. The young woman brought into A&E in cardiac
arrest, having been chatting to her hairdresser one moment as the hair
dye was applied, then suddenly going into anaphylactic shock from the
dye -- an explosive allergic reaction. She expired on the resuscitation
trolley, the red hair-colour staining the white linen beneath her head
like a smear of fresh blood. Sometimes they stick in your mind because
you can perceive something of yourself in them, perhaps by being of a
similar age, having the same interests or because you can imagine being
friends in the outside world. Occasionally they are memorable for other
reasons, like the young woman I met who had suddenly developed blindness
and paralysis of the legs, whose lumbar puncture I was tasked with --
the first of my career. Fifteen years later, as a consultant, I met her
again on the wards after another admission, her face largely unchanged,
although both of us were slightly greyer. On looking through her medical
notes, I found my own scrawl documenting the procedure from over a
decade earlier, and recalled the wave of euphoria at my first successful
spinal tap. When I reminded her of this, she told me she remembered my
voice. Other patients stick in the mind because I have cared for them
for a long time, witnessing their unstoppable decline and the impotence
of modern medicine in treating brain tumours, motor neurone disease,
horrible genetic conditions; people like Rahel, in Chapter 1, or Dennis,
one of the first patients I looked after as a junior doctor. He ad been
admitted onto our urology ward in urinary retention on day three of my
life as a doctor. Where he had come from was a bit of a mystery, but
Dennis was in the latter stages of dementia. He had been a merchant
seaman in a previous life, and with his grey, bushy nautical beard kept
neatly trimmed by the nurses, and his anchor tattoos, he had an air of
Captain Birdseye about him. Twenty-two years later, I can still see
Dennis' face in my mind's eye, as if it were yesterday. He lived in the
moment, with little recollection of the passage of time. Every morning I
would go into his room to be greeted by a manic toothless grin and a
shout of 'Good morning!' at the top of his lungs. Always cheery, for no
good reason, with a gentleness of face and

demeanour. His urinary retention had long been sorted out, and my bosses
were eager to get him off the surgical ward so that they could admit
other patients for surgery. In the words of Samuel Shem's novel House of
God, a dark and hilarious satire that almost every doctor is familiar
with, he was a true GOMER (Get Out of My Emergency Room) -- the first
rule of the House of God was 'GOMERs don't die', and apart from his
urinary symptoms and dementia, Dennis was in fine fettle. But he had
nowhere to go to, and my mission was to find him a destination. For
three months we were locked into bureaucratic and administrative
purgatory, with endless cycles of finding a home for him before being
told that the promised bed in a nursing home was unsuitable or
unavailable. All the while, I was greeted every day by a hollered 'Good
morning!', a perpetual Groundhog Day. But despite Dennis' limited
understanding of the passage of time, his unchanging clinical
environment began to take its toll and he stared to show little flashes
of frustration, undertones of anger in his morning greeting. In the last
week of my post, we finally heard the news that Dennis would be
discharged. A bed in an appropriate nursing home had been found and,
importantly, funding had been agreed. Dennis' sentence on the urology
ward was due to come to an end, the release date set for the coming
Tuesday. We were all delighted, my mission -- for Dennis to leave
urology before I did -- looking hopeful. Even Dennis seemed a little
more upbeat, perhaps sensing the lift in the atmosphere around him. And
so, as I walked out of the hospital on Friday night for the weekend,
knowing that my post was to finish the following Tuesday, with Dennis
having departed to a home on the very same day, I had a slight spring in
my step. Coming in early on Monday morning, I anticipated my penultimate
'Good morning!' as I started the ward round. But when I got to Dennis'
room, the bed was empty, stripped of sheets, all personal possessions
gone. Initially I assumed there had been a miscommunication, that he had
departed to the nursing home earlier than agreed, a rare example of
efficiency. But I soon learned that Dennis had departed to an
alternative destination. Over the weekend, he had suddenly experienced a
cardiac arrest, and died. A prisoner of circumstance for the last three
months of his life, within touching distance of the finishing line but
falling at the last step. He had broken the first rule of the House of
God.

There are two other categories of patients that stand out. The first is
those for whom I could have made a difference but wasn't able to, where
I question wether, had I done something differently, the outcome would
have changed. In my own specialties, of epilepsy and sleep, there have
been patients found dead at home -- the sudden, unexplained death of
epilepsy or the more readily explained death from drowning due to a
seizure in the bath; patients with sleep disturbance committing suicide,
tortured by their own minds; occasionally brain tumours, small and
continuously monitored, suddenly and unexpectedly transforming to
something much more malignant and aggressive. I am not eager to dwell on
these cases in the pages of this book, but suffice to say that decisions
I have made -- the choice of starting or not starting a drug, of
scanning someone now or in three months' time -- still come back to
haunt me in the small hours months or even years later, names and faces
seared into my memory. But the other category of patients are those
affected when medics have inflicted damage -- not through their deeds,
but through their words; what I term 'iatrogenic communication' or
communicationis iatrogenica imperfecta. Nowadays in medical school,
there is a huge focus on communication skills, the ability to extract
and convey information in a way that is efficient, kind and
intelligible, but it was not always this way. Even as relatively
recently as my own time at medical school, we would roll our eyes at
this, eager to get to the nitty-gritty of blood, surgery, fancy drugs,
expensive tests. But I now understand that one can be the most academic
doctor, reading avidly and able to quote the latest studies, knowing
every single cause of a certain positive blood test or being highly
skilled with a blade, but that in itself does not make one a good
doctor. Without the ability to talk on a human level, to empathise,
nderstand, grieve alongside your patient, to connect on any level, even
superficially, it is impossible to doctor well. A major part of our role
is to convey risk, uncertainty and judgement. To do this while
understanding that the person sitting in front of us is more than just a
patient or disease, that outside the confines of the consulting room's
four walls they are a parent, a spouse, a colleague, with competing
responsibilities and psychological pulls, all of which influence their
health and the decisions they make about it. Without empathy and
communication, we would be no better than robots. But over the years, I
have seen some truly awful examples of unthinking communication, where
the words of a

doctor have caused as much harm as the inexpert wielding of a scalpel or
the prescription of the wrong drug. There's the consultant surgeon
whipping back the bed covers to expose a patient's blood-starved leg,
bluntly saying, 'It's got to come off!', before striding away to the
next bed. Or the registrar on the elderly care wards whose ability to
communicate with empathy was so awful that we juniors used to have to
visit all the patients after the ward round, trying to repair some of
the devastation he had wreaked. In particular, I recall one poorly
elderly lady who had been admitted with chest pain. She was upset not
only by her predicament but also by the fact that her husband had died
on the very same ward some six months earlier. She was desperate to get
out of there. The Butcher -- nicknamed for his cackhandedness at empathy
and kindness as much as for his clinical skills -- simply nodded,
listening as her tears fell, before smiling and attempting to reassure
her with, 'It's okay! People die in hospital.' He then turned round and
walked on, satisfied that he had made her feel better, the sound of
escalating wailing ringing in my ears as I followed him to the next bed.
To this day,I still question how he thought that his response was in any
way helpful, although, in his defence, I think his interactions with
patients were clearly borne of ineptitude rather than malice. As a
neurology registrar, for a period of time I would regularly take the
Tube on a Friday afternoon from St Thomas' Hospital to Moorfields Eye
Hospital. There, among the vast numbers of individuals with glaucoma,
cataracts or retinal problems, would be patients for whom the
ophthalmologists could do nothing, either because the problem with their
vision was outside the eye, or because, ophthalmology being primarily
(but not exclusively) a surgical speciality, the problem could not be
fixed with an operation. So, my boss at the time, a neurologist by
training but particularly interested in vision, would travel between
various hospitals in London, providing a service for the evaluation,
diagnosis and management of these complex patients. The Friday p.m.
clinics at Moorfields would be a combination of service and training, in
a large room equipped with various bits of kit and multiple desks, where
the neurology and medical ophthalmology trainees would see patients
referred in from the rest of the hospital. My consultant would
circulate, we would present the patient and our conclusions to him, and
wait for the nod or a shake of the head. There was a degree of theatre
to this too. He was world-renowned and people

would travel from all over to observe his clinics. For each patient, he
would hold forth in front of the assorted doctors and patients, his
brain an encyclopaedia of clinical information. He would draw our
attention to a tiny clinical detail, or describe some study he had done
twenty years earlier that threw light on the condition at hand; a
veritable walking textbook. The mjority of the patients we saw had
visual migraine, stroke or conditions affecting the muscles or nerves to
the eye, but there were a fair few rarities thrown in. During one of
these clinics, I was asked to see a gentleman in his early sixties,
accompanied by his wife. As I sat down with him in a corner of the huge
communal clinic room, the lack of privacy astonishing, he began to tell
me how his vision had been deteriorating for the past two or three
years. He was finding it progressively difficult to read, and just felt
that there was something else wrong, although he could not precisely put
his finger on it. Over the course of the preceding two years, he had
been back and forth between high-street opticians and the
ophthalmologists. All tests had returned normal, although some corneal
abnormalities had been identified. Despite several procedures to his
eyes, his vision had not improved. If anything, it was worsening, which
was why he had been referred to this clinic. When I examined him, it was
clear that his near and far vision were entirely normal, as were his
eyes. But when I asked him to read some text, he found it almost
impossible. Becoming suspicious that this was indicative of a brain
rather than eye problem, I pulled out a small green book, a tool we use
for cognitive testing. Among its pages are pictures of faces to test
facial recognition, line drawings of various animals and tools to
recognise visual meanings, like pictures of boys playing with
sandcastles on a beach. And as we worked our way through these tests, it
became clear that while the gentleman's eyes were normal, the visual
cortex -- the part of the brain drawing meaning from visual inputs --
was far from working normally. He could not make out broken letters and
had difficulties recognising simple vsual objects -- a teapot, a shoe, a
padlock. Putting together the time course of the progression of his
complaints, a previously normal CT scan of the head, and the nature of
his cognitive problems, I was fairly convinced that this was an unusual
presentation of Alzheimer's disease, a diagnosis subsequently proven
correct. I asked him what he thought might be going

on, but it was obvious that neither he nor his wife had any inkling of
this -- they were convinced it was some as-yet unrecognised eye
complaint. The time came for me to present my findings to my boss, and
as I began, other doctors, ophthalmologists, gathered round. Out of the
corner of my eye I could see the patient and his wife listening
carefully, hanging on every word; I have always been uneasy with this
aspect of clinical life, as it is sometimes deeply unhelpful to discuss
a patient's case in front of them. I got to the end of the findings and
paused, fearful of outlining my conclusion, knowing that the man and his
wife did not expect the diagnosis I had made. After a few seconds, I was
asked what I thought was going on, and I responded, 'I think he has
beta-amyloid deposition,' using a highly technical phrasing implying
Alzheimer's disease but allowing me to shield the poor couple from
having the diagnosis broken in such a public and brutal manner. There
was another brief pause, before one of the ophthalmologists blurted out,
'What? You think he has Alzheimer's disease?' The look of horror and
dismay on that man's and his wife's faces has never left me, the cruelty
of that moment carved deep. Every time I think about that awfulness, I
feel a rising tide of nausea. The case clearly illustrates the damage we
can do, the addition of insult t the original injury of the disease. But
it also exemplifies something else: that, as with visual hallucinations,
such as Nina's, or other visual phenomena, the loss or diminishment of
vision may also be due to problems outside the eye. Eye disease, as all
ophthalmologists will recognise (although may occasionally miss), is not
the sole cause of loss of vision. In our speciality bunkers, we all have
a tendency to see a symptom through the prism of that speciality. While
the eyes capture light, and turn that light into electrical signals, it
is in the brain that we 'see' -- where sense and meaning is made of the
outside world. At each level in the nervous system, the degree of
complexity increases, the richness and consequence of our visual
universe added in layer upon layer. And the way the problem or defect
manifests depends on where in the nervous system it originates. In the
case of the man just described, a gradual, diffuse deterioration of the
visual areas of the cerebral cortex, where Alzheimer's disease rarely
has a predilection, results in an inability to interpret the
complexities of writing or the significance of visual objects. But in
other people, damage to different areas of the visual system may
manifest very differently.

I have been seeing Dawn now for many years. An unknown genetic mutation
has caused her to develop multiple 'benign' tumours inside her head,
tissue derived from the outer lining of the brain called the meninges. I
use the term 'benign' in inverted commas as, although these tumours do
not spread to other regions of the body, in Dawn's case they are
steadily robbing her of her sight, as well as causing other
complications. As they gradually expand, over the years they are
relentlessly compressing the optic nerves, those thick cales conveying
visual information from the retina to the brain. Dawn's problems first
came to light when she began to experience difficulties in the
classroom. She was working as a teaching assistant, and noticed that she
was having difficulty reading. It all started very subtly. 'I was
getting headaches and I wore glasses anyway, so I presumed I needed a
new prescription,' she tells me. She ignored her worsening vision for a
while, but recalls, 'On one occasion I was asked to read a notice to the
class, but realised that I could not read it. I passed it to one of my
colleagues, pretending I needed to go and do something else.' But it was
only when she eventually went to an optician that she realised there was
a problem. What Dawn initially neglects to mention is why she actually
took action and booked herself an appointment. She eventually confesses,
'It got to the stage where my driving was becoming quite bad.' She
pauses briefly. 'I did actually have an accident. But I blamed that on
the sunshine.' She crashed into the back of a stationary bus. Despite
Dawn telling herself that it was simply a case of being dazzled by the
sun, her husband, Martin, insisted that she go to an optician, under
threat of divorce. 'In a pretty forceful way,' Martin adds. The optician
noted worrying signs at the back of her eyes: a swelling of the optic
nerve as it exits the eyeball, indicative of raised pressure inside the
skull. She was rapidly sent to a doctor. The initial view was that this
represented a condition known as idiopathic intracranial hypertension,
seen most frequently in young, often overweight women, in whom, for
unclear reasons, fluid absorption from the brain is impaired, causing
pressure to build up. 'The doctor I saw at the hospital actually said
that they thought it was a condition that was rectifiable. He sai that
they

should be able to do something about it. So I suppose you walk away with
a certain air of positivity...' But a phone call from Dawn's GP dashed
her hopes: it was another case of communicationis iatrogenica
imperfecta. I ask her what the doctor told her. 'Basically, she said,
"We've got your scan results back and we found five tumours." And that
was pretty much it.' Dawn was devastated -- she was alone at home when
she received the news, no one to talk to, not knowing if these tumours
were benign or malignant. 'A hundred and one questions floating around
in your head at that point. With no answers.' Try as we might to deny
it, there is randomness in life. The course of our existence can pivot
on a pinhead. The fragility of our lives, much outside our own control.
We live in a world where we are told that if we don't smoke, don't
overeat, don't drink too much and get plenty of exercise, we will live
to a ripe old age, that we hold our own destiny in our hands. But as I
think about people like Dawn in that moment in time, at the age of
twentynine being delivered a telephonic blow shaking her existence to
its core, I am reminded of the arbitrary nature of health and sickness.
There are personal reminders too. A few months ago, some expected news
came -- news that I was dreading. A friend of over twenty years had
passed away from cancer -- a neurosurgeon; serious, hardworking,
operating on the brains of people with tumours. I had known him since
our early twenties as very junior doctors -- fun-loving, urbane,
artistic, super-fit, devilishly handsome, filled to the brim with the
vigour of life. At my wedding, he and his wife-to-be finally left the
dancefloor at six in the morning, and at his own wedding we also danced
through the night. One moment a successful surgeon, a father, a
sportsman, the next moment with colon cancer, spreading to his liver and
lungs. He was oly a couple of years older than me, in his late forties
when he died, leaving behind two young children and his wife. In the
last few months, he had been too filled with frustration and anger at
the universe to see anyone, railing against the unfairness of it all.
Emails and texts went unanswered. So I wrote him a letter, old-style, on
pen and paper. I wrote of how his life was woven into our own, of his
presence in my own and my wife's history. I wrote of his importance to
all those people around him. But I also wrote of our views as doctors --
that day in, day out, we see people whose lives have been blighted by
illness, whose time on this

earth has been cut short. But in our day-to-day practice, we protect
ourselves. We believe it is us and them, that we will not be touched by
the same hand of Fate that has anointed our patients. We stand apart,
sheltered by an invisible shield, imaginary personal protective
equipment. And we rationalise this. As young doctors, we pretend that
disease is simply a function of age. As we get older, and our patients
get younger, this becomes increasingly difficult, but we persist in this
self-deception; the reason for their illness is poverty, poor lifestyle
or genetics, any angle that we can find to differentiate ourselves from
them. While in our hearts we believe this, in our heads we know that
this is not the full explanation. Of course, our lifestyle and personal
circumstances influence our likelihood of death and disease -- we all
know that. But if we are honest with ourselves, we also are frequently
witness to the randomness of life, the unpredictability, the throw of a
dice. I think of Dawn, and the litany of people I have seen ovr the
years, whose lives have been randomly and irreparably damaged or
curtailed. As healthcare professionals, if we reflect, we know all of
this, even if for the most part we ignore it. But for the majority of
people, protected from this aspect of life unless it directly affects
us, the arbitrary nature of health and illness goes unrecognised,
especially if we are lucky enough to live in a country equipped with
modern medicine, in control of our own destinies. But there is something
else that has shattered that illusion, for all of us. As I write, we are
in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic. In London, we are past the first
peak, the hospitals slowly discharging patients, destined for home or,
in too many cases, the morgue. We are living in a state of limbo,
uncertain as to the future, whether Covid-19 will simply slowly peter
out or if we will experience a second or third wave \[the answer has
since been forthcoming, and one wave has become an ocean\]. This
pandemic compels us to accept that there are forces beyond our control,
that chance has a role. Our health, our vitality, can turn on the spin
of a coin, a cough of a passerby, a hand on a shopping trolley. We live
with the knowledge that modern medicine is fallible, imperfect, and does
not have all the answers. That realisation -- that we are mortal beings,
fragile and vulnerable in ways that we never truly previously considered
-- has had a deep emotional impact on almost everyone. For healthcare
workers on the front line, there is the expression of anxieties and
fears not previously heard, a rising sense

of doom at the prospect of their work. For many of us, there has been
the nightly ritual of looking at the statistics, counting the deaths,
trying to quantify them through the phrase 'underlying helth issues', a
euphemism for 'not like us'. Equally, there is the horror of seeing
stories of death in people younger and fitter than ourselves. For all of
us, the pandemic has led to a re-evaluation of ourselves, the frailty of
our bodies, in the recognition that the effects of this disease are
unpredictable; a mild cough or loss of sense of smell, a prolonged stay
in intensive care, or worse -- its effects simply the luck of the draw.
And whatever the outcome of this pandemic, this knowledge will persist
beyond the virus itself. Much like the death of my friend, it is a
brutal reminder that some aspects of life are simply beyond our sphere
of influence, that life is intrinsically random. And as I think of
Dawn's wait for answers, as a mother of two young children, aged nine
and six at the time, her life turned upside down by a phone call, I can
only imagine her terror -- the knowledge that growing inside your head
are foreign invaders of your brain, robbing you of your sight, and
possibly your life. In the course of every medical career, the times
when you utter a sentence that you know is going to fundamentally change
someone's life are all too common, and it is easy to become inured to
these occasions. But the power of a single word -- 'cancer', 'stroke',
'haemorrhage' -- is almost unfathomable unless you are on the receiving
end. We all have blind spots, metaphorically but also literally. For
every one of us, even with normal sight, the visual world is incomplete.
As we look straight ahead of us, all of us have gaps in our vision. This
is because the retinas at the back of our eyes -- a semi-sphere of
sensors coating the globe of the eye, capturing all the light entering
through our pupils -- are not entirely uniform. In the dead centre of
retina, equating to the centre of our field of vision, is the fovea,
which consists of an island of desely packed cone receptors, like a
high-definition camera, allowing us to interpret fine detail. As the
retina spreads out to the sides, our peripheral vision is governed by
less tightly crammed receptors -- fewer of the cones that detect colour
and, as we move further out still, largely rods -- sacrificing colour
for

great sensitivity, allowing us to see in incredibly low lighting
conditions. But, surprisingly, as well as being non-uniform, the retina
is not even contiguous; there is a large hole in the light-detecting
layer of receptors, not so far away from the centre of our field of
vision. The cause of this hole is entirely a problem of engineering. All
those rods and cones, and those impulses signalling light, dark, colour,
contrast and intensity, need to be conveyed outside of the eyeball to
the brain itself. There needs to be an exit for all these signals, a
portal out of the globe of the eye. And so the retinal outputs are
bundled together to form the optic nerve, leaving the eye through the
optic disc. As I peer into someone's eye through the tiny aperture of an
ophthalmoscope, I look for the optic disc, cupped like the swirl of
water in a bath plughole, the flow of optic information down the drain.
In the absence of receptor cells in this area of our eyeballs, we are
rendered visually impaired, at least in the area of the optic disc, with
small islands of blindness at roughly 15 degrees to either side of our
centre of vision. Yet we are completely unaware of our imperfect vision.
With both eyes open, it is perhaps more easily understood why that
should be the case. In each eye, this blind spot is slightly lateral to
the centre of vision, so the two areas do not overlap. The small area
that is undetectable to the left eye is seen by the right eye, and vce
versa. But now close one eye. Your vision still looks intact. The blind
spot is still invisible, even without vision from the other eye to
compensate. In part, this is because our eyes are constantly moving,
darting around, and so the area of the field of vision within the blind
spot is continually shifting. But even if you fixate your vision on one
spot, the blind spot will not announce itself. Your nervous system, your
eye and brain, will fill in the gaps, extrapolating what it can see
around the blind spot. A line that runs across the full width of your
vision, thereby in part falling across your blind spot, will be
reconstructed by your brain as an unbroken line. In fact, the only time
you will be aware of your blind spot is if the entire object you're
looking at falls within it -- a finger, for example, or, in clinical
practice, the red head of a hatpin. Try it for yourself. Close your left
eye and take a transparent ballpoint pen with a coloured cap in your
right hand. Fixate your vision on a point in the distance, then
gradually bring the pen towards the centre of your field of vision from
the side, along the horizontal. As you approach the centre of your field
of vision, a few

inches to the right, the pen cap will momentarily disappear as the whole
of it is projected on the optic disc of the right eye, undetectable to
the retina or your brain. Move only a few millimetres, and the cap will
miraculously reappear as its image falls back on the retina. For most of
us, this design feature of the eye is imperceptible and immaterial,
nothing more than a quirk of human physiology, to be noted in biology
lessons in school. But for some people, blind spots are more meaningful,
more immediate, more intrusive. If the optic disc is swollen, by
increased pressure inside the head or compression of the optic nerve
this physiological blind spot may enlarge, so that objects are more
easily swallowed up within it, making the black hole of vision more
obvious. Even more distressing is the presence of a blind spot in the
centre of the field of vision, the fovea, where images are focused for
the most detailed vision, to read, to recognise faces, to see in detail.
Macular degeneration, a breakdown of the retina in precisely this area,
leaves people with disruption of vision in precisely the area where you
most want it; a life of constantly trying to look around a haziness or
distortion, the tantalising view of something in your periphery, the
temptation to look directly at it only to find that when you do so you
cannot see it clearly at all. With retinal detachment, meanwhile,
swathes of the retina come away from the eyeball, leaving large areas of
vision desolate. One overriding feature of these blind spots, resulting
from problems within the eye itself, is that they tend to affect the
vision in either eye differentially. A retinal detachment or macular
damage in one eye may make little difference to overall vision, the
other eye being unaffected and still 'seeing' what the abnormal eye has
lost. But it is not just damage to the eye itself that results in loss
of vision, as we have already seen. Injury to any part of the visual
system can do this. Understanding the organisation of these visual
pathways can help identify the location of any impairment, depending on
the nature of the blind spot someone describes. As the impulses from
each retina travel out of the eye, an optic nerve carries those retinal
signals back towards the brain. The left and right optic nerves carry
entirely separate visual information, from the left and right eye
respectively. But as the optic nerves track back from theeyeballs, they
merge, deep behind the bridge of the nose. In this area, called the
optic chiasm, the first bit of integration between left and right eye
occurs. Fibres carrying

information about the left field of vision from the left eye, cross over
to the right side, while those fibres carrying information from the
right field of vision of the left eye do not; at the same time, fibres
from the right eye, conducting the right field of vision, also cross
over to the left. Information from the two eyes is fused and
communicates the whole field of vision, with information about the left
visual world carried on the right part of the brain, and vice versa.
Essentially, beyond this point, the eyes are no longer separate. So, by
mapping out blind spots, ophthalmologists and neurologists can usually
identify the source of visual loss. The flow of optic information
through these pathways is like a wiring diagram of a house, a guide for
the electrician trying to identify a short circuit. If the blind spots
are in different locations in either eye, this suggests the problem is
in the eye or the optic nerve -- anywhere in front of the optic chiasm.
If the blind spots are the same in both eyes, it implies that damage has
been done behind the optic chiasm, once the channels of information no
longer discriminate between the two eyes. And certain patterns of blind
spots may even point towards damage at the optic chiasm itself. The two
optic nerves come together, fusing in the optic chiasm, adjacent to the
pituitary gland. An expanding pituitary, usually due to a benign tumour,
may compress the optic fibres that cross over in the chiasm -- the
fibres that encode the lateral field of vision. Tumours of the pituitary
will often result in loss of both eyes' lateral field only, esentially
causing the vision of a blinkered horse -- normal immediately ahead, but
with nothing to either side. For Dawn, thankfully, the wait for further
answers was not too long. She was soon given appointments with an
ophthalmologist and neurosurgeon in quick succession. Her MRI scan
confirmed the explanation -- the presence of the tumours -- but there
was a wave of relief when she heard the news that the tumours were
benign rather than malignant, meningiomas derived from the outer lining
of the brain rather than intrinsic to the brain itself. But the good
news was tinged with bad. A solitary tumour was responsible for her
visual loss, wrapping itself around the optic chiasm, explaining why
both eyes were affected; the tumour was gradually squeezing the life out
of the optic nerves where they come together, destroying the connections

between eyes and brain. The size and location of the tumour was highly
challenging, but without surgery it was clear to Dawn and her surgeon
that she would continue to go increasingly blind. At the age of
twenty-nine, with two young children, the prospect of going blind was
horrifying, and despite the difficulties of surgery and the lack of
guarantee of saving her vision, Dawn decided to proceed. 'Harrison, my
son, was only six at the time,' she recalls, 'so the best way we could
actually explain it to him -- which probably sounds quite silly -- was
as the TV and the video player. It was the cable in between the two that
wasn't working. And that seemed to be the best way to make him
understand, because we weren't sure after the surgery how much sight I
would actually have.' The family were coming to terms with the
diagnosis, making decisions about risky surgery, managing how to break
the news to the children. Meanwhile, Martin, serving in the Britis army,
was about to be deployed to Afghanistan. It must have been a horrendous
time, but even now, as Dawn recounts this moment in their lives, she has
a levity in her voice, a nononsense narrative. She remembers the
conversation with her neurosurgeon well. 'I did actually say that I
didn't want too much information, because the choice to have the surgery
in some ways had been taken out of my hands -- because if I didn't have
the surgery, the sight was going to continue to deteriorate. But if I
had the operation, there was the possibility that they could save some
of my sight. It wasn't really a question, was it?' By the time the
surgery took place, Dawn's vision was already poor. I ask her if she
remembers what she could see at that time. 'Things were not brilliant,'
she says. She could just about make out Martin's face, and could see the
television screen if she sat very close to it. 'But I remember sitting
on my hospital bed the night before the surgery, and things didn't seem
too bad.' She remembers waking up from the general anaesthetic. 'I was
sitting on the ward. I didn't want to ask anybody to turn the lights on
and open the curtains. But apparently the lights were on and the
curtains were open.' It took her some minutes to realise that she was
now completely blind. To describe the aftermath of the surgery as
difficult is an understatement. She had been warned that it would take
months, even a year, to fully appreciate whether any sight had been
saved. Martin recalls feeling sick at the realisation that Dawn,
bloodied bandage wrapping her head, could see nothing at all -- no
light, just dark. It was the uncertainty that they found

most testing, not knowing if Dawn would ever recover, or if she would
remain in perpetual darkness, and ll the while trying to explain this to
their two young children. Over the intervening years, I have seen Dawn's
vision fluctuate. At times she has been able to make out aspects of my
face -- 'I can just about see the outline of your head, and a bit of
movement,' she tells me when I ask her if she can see the colour of my
hair, 'but nothing more than that.' Her vision did improve somewhat in
the months that followed the surgery. 'I could see a haziness in my left
eye, like looking through very thick fog,' she says. But describing her
vision now, she says there are 'no details, and only some colours. I can
go into a shop with my daughter, Charlotte, and show her a jumper that I
think is very nice; I think it is cream but it turns out to be a
luminous pink.' Charlotte grimaces and laughs at this. Over the past
year or two, unfortunately the fogginess in the centre of her vision has
also gone black. The vision in the right eye has never really recovered
after her surgery, and has been lost for ever. Dawn is now left with a
tiny island of sight. 'At the moment, I have a very small patch of
better vision at the top, and if I tilt my head, get my chin on my
chest, I can sometimes make out details.' The strangulating tumour has
damaged the nerve fibres beyond repair, perhaps compounded by
radiotherapy to the remaining tumour a year after surgery, an effort to
shrink the tissue left behind after the operation. Further surgery is
too difficult, simply too risky to contemplate. In my mind's eye, Dawn
still sees. When I see her in my clinic, she moves around the room with
ease, looks me in the eye when we are talking, looking to all intents
and purposes like someone with normal vision. But her resilience and
resourcefulness mask the degree to which her vision is impaired, and in
the past couple of years I have heard the tapping of her white stick as
she turns into the clinic rom from the corridor outside, the most
obvious reminder of her blindness. In our clinic appointments, she is
not someone to dwell on the impact on her life, but outside the
constraints of the clinic, in her own home, she opens up a little. 'I
can now see light and dark, but no detail, no faces.' When I ask her how
her other senses help mitigate the loss of sight, she laughs. 'I've
become very good at burning myself when I cook!' She pauses, and
continues on a more serious note. 'I rely quite heavily on my hearing,
but

sometimes I have quite loud tinnitus in my left ear,' -- another tumour
sits directly on one of the nerves supplying the ear -- 'which disrupts
the hearing aspect as well. There's smell, obviously. I do have to feel
for things if I've dropped something on the floor -- on your hands and
knees, searching. Breaking things is horrific. I have broken a glass
once and had to just shut the kitchen off until somebody was around to
come and do it for me. Losing my independence -- I think that was
probably the biggest thing.' The loss of independence while trying to
bring up two young children makes Dawn's experience all the more
poignant. The Army have been very accommodating. Martin's forthcoming
deployment to Afghanistan was quickly shelved, and a shift in role to
physical training instruction has made life a little more flexible for
the family. The tight-knit community of Army families has been a
life-saver for them, providing support and help, and despite the
transformation of their livesover the past decade or so, the loss of
vision, and Dawn's other problems that we will come to explore, as well
as the uncertainty about what lies ahead, she and Martin are, amazingly,
still smiling, still laughing, stoical in the face of adversity that
would leave most of us crushed. Loss. To no longer have something, or to
have less of it. The loss of life, loss of a relationship, loss of a
precious object, loss of money -- that something you once possessed is
no longer there. The pain or discomfort of knowing what it was like to
hold something or someone in your hands, and to feel that absence, the
ache of longing. For some people, however, the absence of something you
have never possessed can also be painful. If you have never had
something -- an arm, for example, or a leg, the ability to walk -- you
can see that those around you have these things or abilities, and you
can still comprehend that you are missing something. The emotional
response may be different, in that you have never experienced or known
anything to the contrary. However, this is loss of a different natue;
your life is unchanged, constant in your experience of it, but your
perception of the impact of this loss on your life can nevertheless be
profound. But when it comes to the senses, there is nothing to see, no
palpable comparison. None of us knows the inner experiences of another
-- whether someone sees the same red as you, feels the same degree of
pain as you,

hears music in the same way you do. In the face of loss of a sense, the
only comparator is your own experience of that sense before the loss and
after, an internal control. But if you are born with the impairment of a
sense, you may live with it all your life without knowing it unless it
manifests in an obvious way, through a test, a mishap, a medical
examination, an incidental finding on a visit to the doctor for
something entirely unrelated. These occurrences are sometimes termed
'incidentalomas' -- an interaction with a medical professional that
identifies a 'problem' you were never aware of, perhaps in a scan
showing an abnormality of your brain that has probably been there your
entire life, or some subtle asymmetry of strength or movement that you
have never noted. In many ways, Oliver is a prime example of this. Now
in his midtwenties, he is forging a career as a film-maker. When I meet
him, he has been busy directing music videos with a friend. His working
life, the media of film and photography, is vision. He inhabits a visual
world. 'I have a little point-and-shoot camera with me a lot of the
time,' he tells me. 'So if I see anything that looks really cool, I can
just pull it out and take a snapshot.' He is slight and softly spoken,
but despite his quiet voice, I can perceive his passion forwhat he does,
his immersion in this world of colours, shapes and movement. And with
Oliver sitting opposite me, casually dressed in dark colours, I see no
evidence of any medical issue, no overt sign of disease or dysfunction.
I ask him how he came to this point. He looks a little sheepish for a
brief moment, then says, 'It's kind of a weird thing. I work with my
friend. Basically, we were working one day, and he was quite bored
because he gets distracted very easily. He started poking me in the
face,' Oliver laughs, before continuing, 'And I couldn't see his hand!
And he was like, "Why can't you see this?" He was just shocked that I
couldn't see anything. But I didn't really think anything of it. This
was maybe a year or so ago.' A few months later, Oliver began to
experience some migraines, accompanied by a visual aura. He describes
the classic features -- the flashing lights starting on one side of his
vision, gradually spreading across his whole field of vision over a
period of twenty minutes, before abating and resulting in a headache.
Oliver tells me, 'I went to the doctor because the migraines were
getting worse. One lasted about two hours. And while we were chatting,
she just very casually did a field of vision test with her

hands. And I couldn't see her left hand. She was very shocked at this,
which is never a good sign when your doctor is shocked and confused.'
This chance finding triggered a diagnostic and emotional roller-coaster
for Oliver. The simple act of the doctor sitting opposite him, comparing
her own visual field to his. Sitting immediately opposite Oliver, she
could see her hand moving on her left, but he was unable to see the same
and. Essentially, in many situations, this is what we doctors do when we
examine patients; we assume that we are the 'normal' ones, assessing the
patient's faculties against our own strength, our own dexterity, our own
hearing, our own vision. It has always struck me as odd that we spend
our lives looking for abnormalities in others by using our own bodies
and nervous systems as templates, as the gold standard for neurological
functioning. Given that we will frequently see patients who are unaware
of the deficits in their neurological systems, much like Oliver, there
is no reason to believe that we ourselves are not harbouring some
anomaly or other. In no other walk of life would I consider my body a
gold standard. 'So, she sent me off to an emergency optometrist,' Oliver
recalls of the aftermath of his GP visit. 'He also did a field of vision
test, and was also very shocked. He said I had the vision of someone
who's had a stroke.' He then adds, with more than a touch of
understatement, 'Which is never good to hear.' Oliver was swiftly
dispatched to the emergency department at St Thomas' Hospital, and he
remained an in-patient there for two days while a battery of tests were
done. This culminated in a review at the Medical Eye Unit ward round, a
Wednesday morning institution that was a firm landmark of my week both
as a senior house officer and as a registrar. Oliver recalls the
experience: 'I went up to see -- it's quite tense -- a group of ten
doctors in a room. Then we waited outside for their verdicts for forty
minutes.' The Medical Eye Unit ward round consists of medical
ophthalmologists and neurologists, consultants, registrars and senior
houseofficers. The patient has had all their assessments and tests in
the preceding day or two, and is then brought into the large room. The
junior doctors present the case and the test findings. The consultants
interrogate the patient, interrogate the juniors, look over the test
results and review some salient examination findings, before reaching
their conclusion. I recall the first few of these I attended as a very
junior doctor, with a limited

knowledge of neurology and a non-existent knowledge of ophthalmology. It
was terrifying, but fortunately the expectation of us junior
neurologists was very low indeed. The major focus of wrath, for the
ophthalmologists in particular, were the ophthalmology juniors (our
neurology boss, meanwhile, was a calm and gentle soul, in whom I never
caught a glimpse of anger in many years). I soon learned that the best
policy for me was to stand on the sidelines, watching the junior eye
doctors coming into the room like lambs to the slaughter, waiting for
the massacre to start. The process was always tinged with the fear that,
at any point, we junior neurologists might suddenly also become the
prey. And the outcome of all these tests for Oliver? The cause for
Oliver's inability to see anything at all on his right side, while
remaining completely unaware of the fact? It was nothing at all to do
with his migraines. 'They told me that the cause was indeed a stroke,'
Oliver says, 'but it happened when I was being developed in the womb, or
straight after birth.' A small blockage of a blood vessel supplying the
primary visual cortex at the tip of his left occipital lobe has resulted
in the absence of the part of th brain responsible for visual awareness,
of conscious sight, in the right side of his world. Oliver's vision has
likely always been this way, since the day he was born or just shortly
after. Without having a reason to compare himself with anyone, he has
always assumed that his vision is just like everybody else's, normal in
every way. He has never known any different. Of the diagnosis, he says,
'I guess there were quite a lot of emotions going on that day, because I
had no idea what it was going to be. You always rush to the darkest
conclusion. I didn't know whether my sight was going to disappear slowly
or altogether, so, if anything, it was almost a relief to know that it
wasn't going to get worse.' It is almost implausible that someone could
go through a quarter of a century missing half their vision without
realising. If it had not been for his incidental migraines, he might
have gone another twenty-five years none the wiser. I ask him if there
have ever been any clues, beyond the incident when his friend was poking
him in the face. Had he played sports at school? 'It's probably lucky I
wasn't very sporty. I'm quite clumsy.' He pauses while thinking, and
continues. 'I used to work around Oxford Circus as a runner,' he recalls
of his days as a junior production assistant in the film or television
industry, 'and there's lots of people there. I thought I was getting

good at walking around people quite quickly. But people always used to
walk into me from the right-hand side. So that was a first indicator, I
guess.' But Oliver also drives, and to my surprise he has never had a
car accident. He does comment that, since learning of his visual issues,
he has noted something about his long-standing clumsiness. When I think
back to all the stuff I've broken or smashed in my house, it has always
been on the righthand side.' A glass perched on the table, a plate on
the countertop -- always on his right, in his blind spot. I still find
it difficult to comprehend how little Oliver's lack of vision in the
whole right side of his world has had so little impact on his life, how
there has been such an absence of overt consequences, bar a few broken
household objects or the odd bump into an oncoming pedestrian. But there
may be a physiological reason for this. During the course of Oliver's
assessment in the Medical Eye Unit, something curious was demonstrated.
While he cannot see any objects on the right-hand side -- no letters, no
colours, no lights -- he can perceive movement. He is blind, but can
see. Britain's declaration of war on Germany in 1914 was unexpected and
unprepared for. One of the many shortcomings in the national effort was
that of medical provision for the conveyor belt of maimed and mutilated
soldiers returning from the front. Major actions in France were
accompanied by government orders to clear beds in London hospitals in
anticipation of the bloodshed to come. Although there were field
hospitals nearer to the killing fields of northern France which dealt
with the immediate aftermath of injuries, officers with neurological
injuries who survived long enough would be transferred to the Empire
Hospital in London, where one of the few neurologists of the time, a man
called George Riddoch, would care for them. Riddoch was born and
educated in Scotland, qualifying in medicine from Aberdeen University at
the age of twenty-five, a year before the outbreak of the First World
War. In 1914 he was appointed a captain in the British Army, to join
Gordon Holmes, a giant of British neurology, asthe second neurologist in
the armed forces. Riddoch's neurological expertise was very much in
demand, and in later years he became instrumental in the care of people
with spinal injuries throughout the UK.

But in 1917, Riddoch observed something peculiar in his patients. He
described five soldiers with blast injuries to the brain, all rendered
blind due to damage to the occipital lobes. While they could not see
stationary objects, they did report being able to see moving targets.
Yet, although they could perceive movement, the nature of the moving
objects was indistinct -- 'vague and shadowy', as Riddoch described it.
There appeared to be a disconnect between the conscious perception of
the form of an object and its movement -- a dissociation between the
static and kinetic. This phenomenon, termed 'Riddoch phenomenon', has
subsequently been repeatedly described. There remains some uncertainty
about the precise neurobiological basis of Riddoch phenomenon. It is
generally held that we cannot have conscious awareness of vision without
an area of the occipital lobe at its very tip, the primary visual
cortex, or 'V1', where visual inputs to the cortex first enter. Damage
to V1, as in Oliver's case, results in a deficiency termed 'cortical
blindness' to discriminate it from forms of blindness caused by damage
to the eye or to the optic nerve. But Riddoch phenomenon causes us to
question this classical view, that all visual information enters the
brain via V1. If that were indeed the case, damage to this area would
likely result in no visual inputs at all entering other visual areas of
the brain, but this is clearly not what is happening in Oliver's case.
Riddoch phenomenon therefore implies that tere are alternative pathways,
bypassing V1, that allow signals to progress to higher areas of the
brain, at least for some aspects of vision. And indeed there is evidence
for the existence of these alternate pathways for the flow of visual
information. In essence, some, albeit limited, information about
movement gets through, circumventing V1 and reaching some other visual
areas, in particular an area called the middle temporal motion complex,
where movement in the visual field is detected. Thus it is possible to
see movement even in the context of being blind. Why these alternate
pathways should exist is a matter of speculation, but clearly, from an
evolutionary perspective, it is important to know if something big is
moving in the periphery of your vision, even if your vision is damaged.
If you see the tiger running towards you, you may survive to pass on
your genes. If you don't, you end up as lunch. And perhaps less
dramatically, Oliver's Riddoch phenomenon has enabled him to avoid

bumping into too many people or smash into oncoming cars while driving.
He has an awareness that objects are moving to the right of him, even if
he cannot really see them. And when I examine him, doing the same
field-ofvision test that his GP performed on that fateful day, it is
clear that, while he cannot tell if my hand is present on the right side
of his face if I just hold it there, he is aware of my hand if I move it
quickly. The concept of being able to see something while being totally
blind, as in Nina's case, or in Oliver's case blind in one half of his
world, is odd enough. It highlights the complexity of the visual
pathways in our brains, how specialised the differen areas of the brain
are in processing different aspects of what we see. But vision gets even
odder. As I explained in Chapter 2, there are two major pathways for
visual processing -- the 'what' and the 'where', and within these
pathways exist specialist areas responsible for colour, texture, faces,
letters, movement, position, and so on. Normal vision (whatever 'normal'
is) requires all these regions of the brain to function in synchrony, to
combine to give us an accurate, or at least relatively accurate,
representation of the world from which we can draw meaning and
facilitate our survival. As a young medical student, I opted to study a
module entitled 'Physiological psychology'. It was at that time that I
was asked to write a paper on why we dream, which triggered a lifelong
interest in sleep. But the very first week in that module was dedicated
to 'blindsight', this oxymoron of a term that makes no sense, akin to
the sort of sighted blindness that Oliver has. The phenomenon of
blindsight represents something broader than Riddoch phenomenon -- that
some individuals, despite having an area of the vision in which they are
totally blind, or at least unaware, may still be able to see, on an
unconscious level, not just movement, but also colour, form or shape.
This appears to be nonsensical, since if someone can see something, then
they are by definition not blind, and there have been arguments raging
around blindsight since its formal characterisation in the 1970s.
Essentially, the 'blind' in blindsight refers to the fact that people
report not seeing anything in an area of their visual field related to
damage in their primary visual cortex. They perceive themselves as
having no vision, either partially or wholly. But if forced to guess the
colour, the form or directon of movement of a visual object in their
blind spot, they get it

right much more than would be the case by chance alone, sometimes up to
100 per cent of the time. The true existence of blindsight has been
repeatedly questioned and alternative explanations have been proposed.
What does conscious vision actually mean? Is it simply that in those
individuals or animals, the primary visual cortex responsible for visual
awareness is not totally destroyed, that islands of functioning V1
remain? Perhaps blindsight could be explained by light scattering inside
the eye, falling onto areas of normal vision? But experimental work in
patients and monkeys has largely addressed these objections, and the
consensus view (although there are few areas of science on which there
is unanimity) is that blindsight is a real phenomenon. In the absence of
conscious vision, information about the visual world still gets through
to the brain about movement, but also colour, shape, orientation and
even facial expressions and the emotions associated with them. And there
are multiple pathways for this flow of data, some of which wok around
the primary visual cortex, the seat of conscious vision. When it comes
to the brain, the concept of blindness is not so straightforward. So
what does this imply for all of us? Perhaps that we are all constantly
seeing without being aware, that our vision provides us with more
information than we are conscious of, that our visual world is more
informative, richer and nuanced than we can ever appreciate. By
extension, if more information is entering our brains than we are aware
of, this means we are conscious of only a part of our visual world and
that what we experience is limited; it is not the whole of our
environment, not a complete recognition of reality. I am intrigued as to
what this experience has done to Oliver's view of sight and the reality
of the visual world, especially as someone who lives and breathes
vision, who works in that medium. He describes it in a metaphor that
befits him as a film-maker, referring to aspect ratios -- the screen
width in relation to its height. 'It brings to the fore how each
person's perception of the world is definitely different. I feel like
other people are looking at the world in widescreen; I'll be in a 4:3
ratio -- a bit more of a traditional 1940sfilm ratio, which is different
rather than inferior, I'd say.' I am intrigued by his comparison of his
vision to the different aspect ratios in films. It makes

me think of the button on the TV remote control that changes the aspect
ratio of the TV screen. When you first change it, it looks strange,
distorted or simply uncomfortable, but within a few moments it is no
longer perceptible. When you watch a widescreen film in a 4:3 rato, you
lose some of the periphery of the picture, your viewing experience
changes subtly, but it does not intrinsically alter your ability to
appreciate the film. In fact, the more I consider Oliver's metaphor, the
more I am taken with it. If you consider what we see on the screen at
the cinema, it is probably radically different from the reality of the
film set. It is obvious that the physical nature of the world around us
is not precisely what we see. It is dependent on our body, its structure
and function. An obvious example of this is colour blindness. A quirk of
fate, or perhaps more precisely the inheritance of a defective gene,
causes abnormal functioning in one of the three types of cone receptor
in the retina, resulting in a different perception of colour. A red
apple may look green to someone with red--green colour blindness, the
commonest type, or may even look grey in rare cases where perception of
colour is totally absent. Similarly, different animals may see the world
very differently, their eyes equipped to see wavelengths of light
outside our own perception. And so objects themselves have no fixed
colour, but their hue or tint is dependent on their observer. Colour is
in the eye of the beholder. When we look at Oliver's film work, what we
see is a function of the recording: the lighting intensity, the framing
by the cameraman, the angles of filming, the settings of the camera
itself -- the depth of field, colour intensity, contrast. All are
parallels for the machinery of the eye: the pupil, the retina, the
directon the eyeball is pointing. But what we see in the cinema is not
just a function of what is recorded. It is also a product of how it is
projected: the colour of the lightbulb in the projector, the errant hair
on the lens projected several feet high onto the screen, the aspect
ratio of the screen itself. The conveying of data -- visual information
-- from the film running through the projector at several feet per
second to the white screen on the wall is like the passage of
information from the eye to the brain. Perhaps even the subtle clues or
subliminal messaging that celebrated cinematographers are known for are
like the unconscious aspects of vision that underlie phenomena like
blindsight or Riddoch phenomenon. And then there are the credits at the
end, countless names scrolling down for several

minutes -- without any one of these people, the film would not have been
the same. The film is more than just the filming. Our vision is more
than just the seeing. OceanofPDF.com

6 COFFEE AND CARDAMOM

'In the odor of young men there is something elemental, as of fire,
storm, and salt sea. It pulsates with buoyancy and desire. It suggests
all the things strong and beautiful and joyous and gives me a sense of
physical happiness.' Helen Keller, The World I Live In 'There is no love
sincerer than the love of food.' George Bernard Shaw, Man and Superman

'Every cuisine tells a story.' So Claudia Roden begins her book The Book
of Jewish Food. 'Jewish food tells the story of n unrooted, migrating
people and their vanished worlds. It lives in people's minds and has
been kept alive because of what it evokes and represents. My own world
disappeared forty years ago, but it has remained powerful in my
imagination. When you are cut off from your past, that past takes a
stronger hold on your emotions.' Roden goes on to write about her
childhood in Cairo, a world of palm trees, scented jasmine and playing
by the banks of the Nile, terminated abruptly in 1956, with the Suez
Crisis. Ended in reality, but not in memory; rekindled by scraps of
recipes kept by friends and relatives, exotic-sounding dishes with Arab,
Jewish and French roots. Every family has its food history -- recipes
passed down through generations, kept alive by the memories and emotions
associated with eating them; dishes that conjure up the warmth and
happiness of childhood, being enveloped by a mother's love. For many,
particularly for immigrant families, these family recipes are also a
language without words, a nonverbal history of origins, of homeland, of
interactions with other cultures, as much a defining feature as the
family name.

My own family's food history is even more complex than Roden's. My
mother's family originated in Baghdad, the place of her birth. She grew
up in a house on the banks of a big river, the Euphrates or Tigris (she
was too young when she left to know which it was); a Jewish house,
speaking Arabic. I recall my grandfather, some fifty years after eaving
Iraq, sitting under a tree in the sunshine, drinking coffee from small
thick glasses, which my grandmother had brewed in a small brass urn on
the stove, while playing backgammon with his friends. The constant
clacking of the wooden counters and the dice on the board. The bitter,
roasted smell of coffee beans mingling with floral notes of cardamom.
Guttural Iraqi Arabic back and forth, probably exactly what they would
have done back in Baghdad. There would be occasional guffaws of laughter
as someone no doubt uttered an unspeakably rude joke. My ears became
rapidly attuned to curses in Arabic as I watched and listened as a young
boy. Back in my grandparents' home, I would enter to find the table laid
out with food that makes me salivate even at the thought of it: steaming
saffron-stained rice with lentils, kibbeh (small dumplings of cracked
wheat stuffed with lamb, cinnamon and pine nuts) or meatballs in an
apricot sauce, with an accompaniment of amba, a spicy sweet-and-sour
relish of mango, limes and a concoction of spices, a potent example of
how food is history. It was probably brought to Iraq by Baghdadi Jews
who had settled in India, trading back and forth between the Middle East
and the Asian subcontinent. My grandmother and her multitude of sisters
would descend upon the feast, talking and cackling, while an Iraqi or
Egyptian soap opera played constantly on the television in the
background, the food taking them all back to a happy childhood, a
privileged upbringing in what at the time was a modern, progressive
city, a melting pot of cultures, languages and religions. My father's
ide of the family was a complete contrast. His mother, my grandmother,
had left Berlin in 1931 at the first sign of trouble, getting on a ship
at the tender age of sixteen and sailing to Palestine, without her
parents. She was tough, hard as nails, swapping a middle-class home in a
city that at that time was considered to be the height of civilisation
to live in abject privation. Her relationship with food was complicated.
For her, it was simply a fuel, a necessary evil to allow her to get on
with the work of the day, not a pleasure to be savoured. For those
around her, it was a demonstration of love, a mode of communication. But
in her eyes, it was

quantity not quality that counted. The more food there was, the louder
it spoke, with huge volumes of Mitteleuropa fare, stewed or baked to
oblivion. Throughout my life, my paternal grandparents had always lived
in Switzerland, and on our arrival there, without exaggeration, there
would be vast piles of chocolate of all sorts and Lebkuchen -- honey and
spice cakes -- stacked precariously on the coffee table. My grandmother
was so insistent in feeding us that we would still be bursting at the
seams from the last meal when the next was served. She took the same
approach with my grandfather, constantly bludgeoning him to eat more. My
grandfather was an extremely gentle man, quiet, intellectual, a polyglot
with an interest in ancient history, philosophy, art and the classics,
and the only time I ever heard him raise his voice was in frustration at
having food forced upon him. Physically, my two grandparents were an
unlikely pairing. She was heavily built, strong as an ox, loud of voice;
she moved with a purpose, and there was a physicality abou her. But
despite my grandmother's aggressive food tactics, my grandfather
remained as thin as a rake, more likely to talk in whispers, moving
slowly around the house. He would pick at food as she tried to shovel it
on his plate. It was only when I got a little older that I realised that
his lack of enjoyment of food was something deeper, a melancholy that
pervaded his life. He had been arrested on Kristallnacht in the German
city of his birth, Breslau -- now called WrocÅaw and situated in the
very west of Poland -- hearing the explosions as the Nazis tossed
grenades into the main synagogue opposite the police station where he
was incarcerated. He managed to escape the Reich on the eve of the
Second World War in June 1939, he and his brother the only survivors of
the family; the others all perihed in the camps. The last he heard from
his parents were brief Red Cross notes before they were transported to
Theresienstadt. A letter from the Panamanian embassy in Amsterdam,
complete with a stamp of the German eagle clutching a swastika, is all
that physically remains of that time, but the trauma lived with him till
his dying day. The letter confirmed safe passage to Panama, exiting
Germany at that time conditional on having a place to go. For his whole
life he had been an atheist German, speaking Hochdeutsch (High German),
dressed in a suit, listening to German classical music, reading the
great German writers and philosophers -- yet rejected by his country of
birth, persecuted, almost exterminated. Ironically, he and his wife were
always known as 'the

Germans' in whichever small corner of Switzerland they lived, and when
he died at the age of ninety-two, he remained an island of Germany in a
Swiss sea, living only a few hundred metres from the German border,
which was literally visible from his home. From his front door, the
burbles, whirlpools and ripples of the Rhine's clear waters were almost
audible, a liquid boundary between hi and his homeland; as close to
Germany as he could possibly get, without actually returning to it. I
wonder now what the river was murmuring to him, what he heard in that
whispered conversation. A few years before he passed away, my
grandfather lost his sense of smell. I recall his meagre appetite
dissolving away and how this already thin man became so fragile that he
looked as if he could snap at any time. As you can imagine, the food of
my childhood was highly varied, and each dish reminds me of different
aspects of my family history -- its origins, its traumas, its
migrations, as Claudia Roden describes. But on an even more personal
note, if I walk past an Arab restaurant on the streets of London and I
catch the smell of Arabic coffee tinged with cardamom, I am drawn
straight back to my grandfather playing backgammon under a tree,
steaming glass in one hand, two dice in the other. With veal and mashed
potato, meanwhile, or a large bowl of Bircher muesli, I am back in my
grandparents' living room in Neuhausen, the audible rumble of the
Rheinfall waterfalls in the distance. The smells and tastes are a direct
road to the past, my own and those of previous generations. As for my
own children, now being fed Punjabi food by my wife's mother, and
schnitzel, bagels, baklava and meatballs with apricot sauce by my own
parents, their food history will be bewildering and fascinating in its
complexity. During a six-month stint in oncology as a junior doctor, I
would regularly see patients whose oral mucosa -- the mucous membranes
lining the mouth -- were inflamed and painful, poisoned by the drugs we
were dripping into their veins. Chemotherapy agents target the
mechanisms allowing cells to divide and multiply, therefore damaging
rapidly growing tumours, but other rapidly replicating tissues would
become collateral damage in the pharmacological battle -- tissues like
the skin, which resulted in irritated and painful palms and soles; the
bone marrow, causing anaemia and low white blood cells; and the gut,
sometimes associated with torrential diarrhoea.

And with mouths sore and tongues swollen, their sense of taste would be
obliterated, gradually returning as they recovered. But outside these
specific circumstances, in a clinical setting, disturbances of taste are
very rare indeed. Other potential causes include medications that may
cause changes to the functioning of the taste buds or alter saliva
production. For example, there is one sleeping pill that seems to have a
predilection for giving people a horrible metallic taste that lingers in
their mouth. I can think of only a handful of people I have seen in my
clinic with a primary complaint of loss or alteration of taste,
specifically. One of those is Irene. The first time we 'meet' is at the
start of the second wave of Covid19. A sudden spike in cases leads us to
carry out most of our consultations by video-call or telephone -- except
not everyone gets the memo. I get a phone call from the hospital while I
am at home, getting Zoom fatigue from yet another video clinic. Irene
has an appointment, but no one has told her it is now a remote
consultation. She is seated in the waiting room, without a doctor to be
found. So our first meeting is over the telephone, she understandably
unhappy that she has come into hospital for no good reason, me at home
embarrassed by the administrative cock-up. The following week we meet
face-to-face, although even then I spend the whole appointment in full
PPE, with visor, mask, gloves and apron, and she wears a mask covering
her face for all but a few minutes while I examine her. She has lived in
London for a while now, but is originally from Toledo in Spain. Her
accent is thick, and from behind her mask it is sometimes difficult to
fully comprehend her. She looks typically Spanish, is young (twenty-nine
years old) and, in contrast to many of the patients who I have seen that
morning, looks pretty relaxed about venturing out in the midst of the
pandemic. Irene has been referred from the oral medicine clinic. For the
past five months she has had no sense of taste -- under the current
circumstances, when she first noticed it she was sure she had contracted
Covid-19 without any other symptoms. Perhaps more concerning is the fact
that Irene is a sommelier. And not just anywhere -- Irene has been
working in Michelinstarred restaurants for several years now. Her palate
is her vocation, the skill upon which all depends. I ask Irene if she
always had a refined palate, if this is what drew her into the world of
wine. But it was by accident. 'I was cooking with my grandma

when I was five years old. I always liked to cook at my house. My family
come partly from the south of Spain, partly from the north.' The north
prides itself on its gastronomy -- fantastic seafood, the cuisines of
Galicia and the Basque country. In the south, the pig is king, with
jamÃ³n ibÃ©rico de bellota being the culinary gold. It comes from Black
Iberian pigs raised in the oak forests of Andalusia and Extremadura,
snuffling between the trees for the acorns that give the meat, cured for
three years, its nutty, creamy magnificence. I am salivating as we
discuss the food of her home. 'I did art for two years -- the history of
art, painting and that -- but I was really sure that I wanted to be in a
restaurant. The idea was to be a chef, to be honest.' Irene initially
undertook a waitressing course, an entry point to the restaurant
business, then a diploma in hospitality. Rotating through the kitchen,
management and front of house, she soon realised that behind the kitchen
door was not for her. 'At that point, I did say, "Okay, why do I need to
be in the kitchen if I really want to be with people?'" An internship in
a one-Michelin-starred restaurant in Marbella turned into a four-year
stint, and she decided that what she really enjoyed was the combination
of food and wine. Following a formal diploma, her knowledge of wines has
led her to establishments across Spain, and for the past two years to
various restaurants in London, places I can only dream of eating in. I
ask her if her palate has been learned or if it is something innate. 'I
think it's something that you have, but it's true that it's important to
train. It's also a skill that you develop.' She talks me through how
people relate wines to flavours or aromas that they are familiar with,
so you need to be conversant with a range of tastes and smells that may
not necessarily be the case without training. Having spent much of her
time in Malaga province, at the southern tip of the Iberian peninsula,
she was fluent in the language of fruits, especially tropical ones like
passionfruit or caqui -- persimmon; she was less acquainted with
aromatic spices like cloves and cinnamon. It was between lockdowns, in
the summer of 2020, that Irene noticed something strange. Restaurants
had just re-opened following a lull in coronavirus cases, and she was
back at work. 'The taste, it was different on one side of the mouth from
the other.' I ask her to describe the nature of that change, but she
struggles a little. I am not sure if it is because English is not her
first language, or if it is simply very difficult to put into words.
'The sensation, it was like a bit more paste-y on the right side.' I
tell her I don't

know what she means by that. She pauses to think, then continues. 'The
sensation of food and the sensation of the drink. It was more ... I
mean, I don't know how to express it. It was creamy. The sensation was
creamy at the beginning.' She clarifies that it was the mouth-feel that
initially altered, and compares it to that slightly woolly mouth-feel
after eating Pringles. Her first move was to take a Covid-19 test, which
thankfully was negative. After a few days, she noticed some discomfort
around her wisdom teeth. A trip to the doctor resulted in a prescription
for antibiotics for a presumed dental infection. Despite the pills, her
symptoms were worsening day by day. She began to experience a lack of
feeling in the right side of the mouth, her gums, her cheek, and
gradually across that side of her face. With a rising sense of anxiety,
Irene had numerous phone calls and trips to the doctor. 'I was so
stressed at that point. For two weeks I couldn't taste the acidity in
wine. I felt, I cannot have my life. I don't have my taste. I mean, I'm
waiting for a promotion now. I wanted to do more stuff related to wine.
No one knew what was causing the problem. No one knew when it was going
to pass. So, I was like, "Give me something to have my taste again!"'
Her persistence culminated in various dental appointments, and finally
an appointment in a maxillofacial clinic with a surgeon. And this is how
she has ended up sitting in a neurologist's clinic room. The surgeon
organised an MRI scan of the face, to look for disruption to the nerves
that convey taste. While these nerves look intact, something else is
evident. The scan shows a patch of signal, white and fluffy, in the
brainstem. It looks like inflammation, taking out an area containing
nuclei that are the inputs for taste and for sensation from the face. A
clear explanation for Irene's symptoms. While there is an obvious
indication as to where the problem originates, the cause of that
inflammation is not clear; inflammation in the central nervous system
has a myriad of possible causes, including various autoimmune disorders
or the aftermath of a viral infection. The most likely cause, however,
particularly in a young woman, is multiple sclerosis, or MS. The
hallmark of this condition is the development of patches of inflammation
in the central nervous system, an out-of-control immune system attacking
elements of the brain and spinal cord. The precise nature of this
autoimmune disease is not fully understood, but what we see on MRI scans
is the development of small areas of damage that correlate with

'relapses', the sudden development of new neurological symptoms like
visual loss, weakness, numbness or loss of bladder control. The
autoimmune assault on the nervous system is directed towards cells that
generate the myelin sheath, a thick wrapping of protein around neurones,
like the rubber coating of an electrical wire. The myelin speeds
transmission of electrical impulses and helps maintain the health of the
underlying neurone, the wire itself. And so, the loss or damage of
myelin results first and foremost in a slowing of conduction speed, but
also subsequent injury to the neurones conducting these impulses.
Depending on the precise location of these areas of damage, and the
circuits disrupted, different symptoms can arise. When I was training as
a junior doctor, we would very regularly see patients whose bodies and
nervous systems had been ravaged by the condition, left paralysed or
blinded by the uncontrolled inflammation gnawing away at their brains
and spinal cords. Even now, over twenty years later, as I drift off to
sleep I remember the faces and voices of certain MS patients I have
treated during my career. One such patient embedded in my past remained
on the ward for the entire six-month period of my first neurology post.
Her devastating MS and associated immobility had left her with bed sores
so deep that her sacrum -- the bony structures of her lower back --
could be seen in the depths of her wounds; months at home with
inadequate care had resulted in the death of these tissues due to a lack
of movement in bed. I was tasked with examining her sores twice a week,
nurses rolling her onto her side, me peeling back the layers of
dressings to her moans of pain, to reveal the gruesome sight and
overwhelming stench of decaying flesh. Despite meticulous care and
regular turning in her hospital bed, the sores refused to heal. The
awfulness lives with me still, and when I think of her I catch a faint
whiff of that terrible smell. She passed away from uncontrollable
infection shortly after I moved on to my next post. But over the years,
we have begun to recognise that there are many people walking around
with MS without any knowledge that they are anything other than healthy.
Small, silent areas of inflammation are visible on brain scans but
invisible to the individual or a doctor. And this area of neurology has
changed beyond recognition in the past two decades. The old aphorism
that neurology is a field with a thousand diagnoses but only one

treatment -- steroids -- is simply not the case any longer. A myriad of
treatments -- injections, intravenous infusions and tablets -- now
exist, to suppress the immune system's attack on the nervous system. In
some cases these treatments can completely halt MS in its tracks, while
in others they slow its activity and progression. Thus, MS has become,
to some extent, an eminently treatable, if not curable, condition --
much like HIV, which was previously a terminal diagnosis but is now
largely a condition limited to the outpatient setting, controlled with
anti-viral medication. That is not to say that people do not experience
significant disability with MS, but for an increasing number this is not
the case. Irene seems surprisingly relaxed about all this, and MS has
already been raised as a possibility. She is more concerned with getting
back her sense of taste. I tell her that we first need to exclude other
possibilities, and I send off a barrage of blood tests. The scans show a
solitary area of inflammation, but a closer look reveals a couple of
tiny areas of inflammation elsewhere in the brain that may represent the
telltale signs of MS. We organise a quick repeat scan, and no further
inflammation has occurred in the interval, the original patch of
abnormality maturing as I would expect following a single episode of
inflammation. From a diagnostic perspective, all we can do is watch and
wait, to see if there is any evidence of further inflammation, either
through the appearance of new symptoms or a repeat scan. Sometimes time
is the best diagnostic tool. From a symptomatic perspective, however,
there are signs of some improvement in Irene, not because of any
specific treatment but due to masterful medical inactivity. The numbness
has improved, although she still finds acidity and bitterness very
difficult to taste. What I find remarkable is that Irene is still
working as a sommelier, still tasting wines, still pairing wines and
dishes novel to her. I ask her how she can do this if her taste is so
disturbed. 'To be honest, before this happened, my ability was more
related to the taste in the mouth, rather than the nose. Of course, the
mouth and the nose are related. Obviously, if you don't sense in the
nose, there's no sense in the mouth at all. But I was more trusting in
my palate rather than my nose. Since I have had this, I have needed to
train my nose.' I ask her what impact it has had on her ability to make
new wine--food pairings. I am not expecting the answer she gives me --
that there has been relatively little. 'The pairings are a bit
subjective, no? I give the wines to my colleagues to

taste and ask what they think about it as well. I taste with them, and
they say, "Wow, it's great. It's amazing," and I'm like, "Okay," so that
works for me as well.' Later, she tells me, 'I am a person who adapts to
everything.' It appears that Irene has adapted to her disturbance of
taste, in part due to her knowledge and memory of the tastes, flavours
and aromas of the various wines, but also due to an increased reliance
on her nose. There are two striking aspects to what Irene tells me. The
first is how little impairment she has from of a change in one of her
five senses, especially given her absolute reliance on this sense for
her job. If a disturbance of taste has such little impact on her,
perhaps it is not surprising that so few people come to my clinic
complaining of taste disturbance. She may notice it, but it is hardly
life-destroying. Perhaps for us mere palate mortals, a subtle change in
taste barely registers. Her impairment of taste seems an order of
magnitude less important than that of my grandfather, whose appetite and
enjoyment of food vanished alongside his sense of smell. The second
aspect is the way Irene discriminates between her palate and her nose.
She is clear that before her medical problems materialised, she relied
much more heavily on her palate, on her mouth rather than her nose.
Pushing her nose into the wineglass, inhaling a lungful of wine-laden
air through her nostrils, was a minor part of the sampling process to
her. But a basic understanding of the science of flavour shows this to
be very far from the scientific truth ... At fifteen, Abi is only three
years older than my eldest daughter, but I am struck by the difference.
They are about the same height and both have long, dark hair, although
Abi's is straight and worn loose. But from the way she speaks, Abi has
clearly crossed the Rubicon and stepped firmly into the threshold into
adulthood, no longer a child. Despite this, in medicine, the boundary
between paediatrics and adulthood is like the Berlin Wall: immovable,
fixed at eighteen years of age. In the world of medicine, she would be
seen by a paediatrician, yet she appears distinctly adult to me. As I
sit opposite her in her family's sitting room, it seems bizarre to
consider Abi as having more in common with a six-month-old infant than
an adult in their early twenties. She lives in a lovely corner of
Dorset; the house is

opposite a small playground and surrounded by fields. Even on a day like
today, with horizontal rain, cast-iron skies and a biting wind, the
beauty of this green corner of England is evident on my journey to her
home along winding country lanes hugging the undulating landscape. As we
chat, Abi's mother, Dawn (not the same Dawn as in Chapter 5), comes in
bearing coffee, and I gratefully warm my hands on the steaming mug. Abi
has lived in the South West for as long as she can remember, but Dawn is
an interloper, originally from Birmingham, and her rounded vowels are a
stark contrast to the local accent. There is obviously contagion of
pronunciation, and Abi's speech patterns swing wildly between a West
Country burr and a Brummie twang, quite disconcerting at first but soon
very pleasing to the ear. Dawn settles next to Abi on the sofa. 'When
she was very little, she was a good little toddler,' she smiles as she
looks across at her daughter. 'No real issues. The only problem we ever
had was at breakfast time or dinner time. She would play up nearly every
meal time; she'd be really naughty.' Dawn recalls her and her husband's
frustration, trying all sorts of parenting techniques to get Abi to eat
her food, every meal turning into a battle of wills, adult versus
toddler. Dawn continues: 'It took some years to realise that she just
wasn't interested in food. As soon as she sat down at the table, she
started yawning and stretching, which we knew was, "I'm not eating what
you put in front of me".' I ask if Abi was interested in desserts. Dawn
laughs, and says, 'Sweet stuff -- she'd be very interested; looking back
on it, anything really sweet, or really salty. In those days, she wanted
everything really well seasoned. When you've got a toddler, the last
thing you want to do is put loads of salt and pepper and things in their
food. And we really struggled with that.' She recalls going out for a
meal with friends, and someone ordering gammon (I think the last time I
touched this was at school, and I recall chewy pink meat, the texture of
a shoe sole, salty like the sea). Abi was given a small piece to try.
'And that was it. All she ever wanted for dinner was gammon. Everything
was gammon!' Abi soon discovered the salt shaker, and by the sound of it
the battle to get her to eat was then replaced by the challenge of
preventing her from dousing everything in salt. Abi was about three
years old the first time Dawn took her to the doctor about her eating
habits. Dawn was told, 'She's a toddler. That's what they

do. She'll eat when she's hungry.' Dawn tried being extremely strict --
'If you don't eat your dinner today, you'll have to have it for
breakfast in the morning' -- the stress of needing to make her child eat
leading to a constant battle. 'When I look back on it, I think what an
awful parent I was.' The lightbulb moment came when Abi was about four
years old. Dawn recalls walking down a lane, taking Abi and some friends
to school. A tractor hauling silage drove past the group. 'And it
absolutely stank,' Dawn tells me. 'It was awful. And I looked at Abi and
I realised there was no facial expression. I looked at the other
children around us and they were all gasping and holding their noses.
Abi just looked very blank, and it was a realisation. I asked her to
breathe in, and she just looked at me as if to say, "I don't know what
you want from me."' Later, she discussed this episode with her husband.
It dawned on them that there had been clues earlier on. 'When children
go to the toilet and they start having smelly poos,' she chuckles, 'and
they say, "Oh, that stinks" -- we had never had any of that. Not once.'
And they realised that Abi had never told her parents that she was
hungry, that she wanted to sit down and eat. At this point, Dawn was
still questioning if she was simply looking for an excuse for Abi's
apparent bad behaviour, but soon realised that this was not the case.
The doctor suggested doing a taste test, so back at home Abi's parents
put a blindfold on her and gave her different foods that she would have
been familiar with. 'And she just didn't recognise anything. We gave her
strawberry yoghurt and she just had no idea what it was. There was no
link to her brain. But as soon as we took the blindfold off, she said,
"Oh, it's my yoghurt."' I turn to Abi, who has been listening quietly to
all of this, stories of her childhood too early to recall herself. I ask
her when she first became aware of something being not quite right, a
difference between her and other children. She recalls her class walking
down the school corridor, by the kitchens, and her friends excitedly
discussing the fish and chips on the menu that day. 'I would be saying,
"How do you know that? How do you know what is cooking behind the
kitchen doors?"' Her memory is one of puzzlement when they told her they
could smell it. On another occasion, someone had left a tuna sandwich in
the car that they'd taken home from a children's birthday party. After
two hot summer days, the sandwich fermenting unnoticed, the stench was
unbearable when it was discovered.

Unbearable to all except Abi, that is. 'Everyone was saying, "Oh, it is
so horrible!", and I didn't understand what they were talking about.' I
can only imagine how confusing it must have been for a young child to
realise that there was a world out there to which all were privy except
her. For Abi, the apparent lack of taste and smell explains much of the
behaviour that her parents noted -- the ambivalence to food, the lack of
appetite, the failure to respond to the stench of silage or the
saliva-inducing wafts from a kitchen. But it is clear that Abi's sense
of taste, in its purest sense, is unaffected: the saltiness of gammon,
the sweetness of chocolate, the sourness of lemon, the bitterness of
coffee -- all are perceptible to her. But the nuance of flavour is
completely absent -- 'Chips taste horrible, just plain to me. I need a
lot of salt, vinegar, pepper, just to give it some sort of taste.
Chocolate fudge cake or a normal chocolate bar have the same taste to
me, just a different texture' -- like listening to an orchestra with
earplugs in, the richness of 'taste' is bled out. And therein lies a
clear truth of our gustatory world -- that when we talk about taste,
what we actually mean is flavour. A truth that we all experience but may
not necessarily be aware of. When we have a cold, food is robbed of its
flavour, rendered bland by nasal congestion. Or there is the taste test
beloved by science teachers, of eating a small chunk of apple or raw
onion, where the flavour becomes difficult to discriminate with the nose
pinched closed. In fact, Abi has her own version of this test that she
uses to try to illustrate her world to friends -- the jelly bean test.
She will blindfold someone and give them different-flavoured jelly beans
while they are holding their nose. Their mouth will be flooded with
sugar, the taste of sweetness bathing their tongues, but it is only on
releasing their nose and breathing through it that the overwhelming
flavour of strawberry, orange or lime will kick in. Flavour is the
ultimate illusion. What we perceive as one sense -- taste -- is not. It
is not even two senses, but three. It is the perfect confluence of taste
from the taste buds of our tongues and the olfactory receptors of our
nose, but also the sensation of the texture of food -- so-called
'mouth-feel'. In the absence of smell contributing to Abi's experience
of flavour, she is unsurprisingly more reliant on texture to guide her
likes and dislikes. 'I really like red pepper. It doesn't really have a
taste to it -- it's sort of watery -- but it's got a nice texture.
That's why I don't like mushrooms -- because

they're slimy. It makes me think of eating a slug. It's disgusting. I
base taste on what I can see and what it feels like, as opposed to the
actual taste.' She describes the experience of eating a burger and her
language is fascinating; she talks about the heat of spices, the
crunchiness of the lettuce, the runniness of the mayonnaise and the
softness of the bun, but no concept of flavour. In essence, taste is a
primitive basic sense, with limited detail or resolution. Our eyes allow
us to experience an almost unlimited palette of shades and hues, our
ears grand symphonies or the drop of a pin. In stark contrast, we can
only discriminate five (possibly a few more) tastes. Historically, we
only talked of four tastes -- sweet, salt, sour and bitter -- but the
relatively recent discovery of distinct taste cells sensing glutamate --
what gives savoury richness, or 'umami', and specific nerve fibres
transmitting these impulses, has added a fifth primary taste modality.
In the past decade, a potential sixth taste has been recognised, too,
with fat receptors identified as recently as 2019. So perhaps in the
next few years we may talk about six primary tastes, but regardless of
the ultimate number -- be it five, fifteen or fifty -- this is a hugely
simplistic way to perceive the world when compared with the hundreds of
different types of human olfactory receptors allowing us to discriminate
many thousands of smells. The fundamental organ detecting taste is the
taste bud, a cluster of sensory cells embedded in the tongue. On a
microscopic level, a taste bud looks like a garlic bulb buried in soil,
the very top of the bulb breaking through to the air. Multiple elongated
cells within the bulb are like the individual cloves of garlic, their
tips reaching the surface of the lining of the mouth. These cells are
not identical, and indeed respond to different tastes -- some, for
example, only to sweet, others only to bitter -- while each taste bud,
consisting of an assortment of taste cells, will respond to a variety of
different tastes. And contrary to what we have all been taught -- that
different parts of the tongue detect different tastes -- the reality is
that we can detect all tastes in all areas of the tongue. And this is
not the only taste myth. Another is that we only taste with our tongue.
In fact, taste buds are found in our palate and even the epiglottis, the
flap of tissue that closes when we swallow, to prevent food or liquid
going down our windpipe. The nature of these cells, and what it is they
taste, is under genetic control, and therein lies an explanation for
some food oddities. Genetic

variants have been associated with the perceived intensity of sweetness
or ability to detect umami. Perhaps the best known of these genetic
influences, however, is the hatred of Brussels sprouts and broccoli.
Owing to a genetic variant, some individuals find a chemical called
phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) and related substances extremely bitter,
others only moderately bitter, while another group cannot taste these
compounds at all. Individuals carrying the genetic variants resulting in
being a bitter 'super-taster' may have a genetic advantage -- they may
find it easier to detect and avoid certain dietary toxins. But there may
also be negative consequences. The avoidance of sprouts, broccoli and
other cruciferous vegetables may also be hazardous, limiting the intake
of the anti-cancer phytochemicals that these foods are rich in. This has
led some researchers to closely examine the association between these
genetic factors influencing taste and risk of cancer. Most of these
studies have not found any association, though one study did find a link
between taste genes and risk of colorectal cancer. It's certainly not
enough evidence to convince children to eat their broccoli, but is a
curious reminder of the huge influence of the make-up of our sensory
apparatus on our experience of the world, a quirk of genetic fate
influencing whether we can detect a chemical in our environment or are
completely ignorant of it -- a form of taste colour-blindness. So, as
Abi and her jelly-bean test illustrate, when we use the term 'taste' it
has two entirely different meanings. In the physiological sense, it
refers purely to the act of detecting chemicals of specific types
dissolving in our saliva and triggering receptors on our tongues and in
our mouths. But in a human sense, it refers to the experience of
flavour, the subtleties of food and drink that enrich our lives, an
integration of taste, smell and feel. And without the nose, there is no
taste in the broader sense of the word. When we smell the world around
us, we draw in air from our surroundings, sniffing a delicate rose
'orthonasally'. But as we chew food, or drink swills around our mouth,
we smell in a different way. Volatile compounds from our oral cavity are
drawn 'retronasally' up beyond the hard and soft palate, then pushed
forward into our nose. So, while our taste sensations are very limited,
our experience of flavour is created somewhere in the depths of our
brains, an illusion of our minds based on the taste, retronasal smell,
temperature and texture -- not one sense but many. This goes some way to
explaining why Irene's ability to sample wine is only modestly affected.

While she has lost limited information about acidity or bitterness, her
palate is largely defined by retronasal olfaction. On an experiential
basis at least, then, taste, or should I say flavour, is an amalgam,
like an alloy; indivisible, qualitatively different from the sum of its
parts. But from an evolutionary perspective, taste and smell remain
separate. The sense of taste can be considered a nutrient sensor or a
detector of toxins, identifying foodstuffs that will keep us alive, help
us grow or be the death of us. Sweet equates to sugar as a source of
energy. Umami is the taste of protein, the building blocks of life.
Bitter is the warning of poison. Smell and mouth-feel add shades of
colour, distinguishing the floral sweetness of a cold, crisp strawberry
from the rich, creamy sweetness of chocolate. Flavour is almost as
important as taste in our evolution. Our responses to sweet or bitter
tastes are predictable and stable -- reliable signals that a food
contains energy or toxins -- but, in stark contrast, our responses to
flavours are malleable and can be learned. We have all had the
experience of eating something that has made us very ill the following
day. It is highly likely that you will have avoided that food for months
or even years afterwards. A single unpleasant exposure can put you off a
certain food for life. But if you become ill from something sweet, to
avoid anything sweet for the rest of your life is definitely not
conducive to survival and passing on your genes. It is flavour --
essentially largely retronasal olfaction -- that determines our liking
of a particular foodstuff, or our revulsion. It has the additional
benefit of allowing us to learn to like what is available if it has
nutritional value, even if to some degree it may taste, say, slightly
bitter. Examples of this are abundant -- substances that children
inherently dislike but that we learn to love as adults, either due to
some nutritional benefit or because in some other way they make us feel
good: beer, whisky or coffee, for example. On an anatomical level, too,
the components of flavour are distinct. The pathways of information into
the brain are separate. Smell, through the olfactory bulb and nerve, is
the only sense with such a direct path into the higher -- more complex
-- areas of the brain. In contrast, signals from the taste buds pass
into the brainstem in a convoluted manner. From the front of the tongue,
taste fibres run within the facial nerve, which is usually considered a
motor nerve, mediating movement of the facial musculature. In fact, one
of the commonest causes of change of taste in my neurology

clinic is in people with Bell's palsy, the sudden paralysis of one side
of the face caused by inflammation of the facial nerve. But taste is
also conveyed by other nerves: the glossopharyngeal nerve, running from
the back of the throat and tongue, and the vagus nerve, from the palate.
These signals convene at the gustatory nucleus in the lower brainstem,
the region damaged in Irene, before being relayed up to the cerebral
cortex. And it is here, in the upper reaches of the brain, that flavour
is created -- in a network of areas centred on the insula but involving
many areas of the limbic system, influencing emotion, memory and reward
-- where taste, smell and oral sensation coalesce. But this concept of
flavour being a product of the brain, not of the food -- that flavour is
an illusion -- is a feature at an even earlier level in the neurological
process. As early on as the mere detection of stimuli in the mouth and
nose, illusions abound. When it comes to our mouth, confusion reigns.
The place in your mouth that you taste something is related more to
mouth sensation than to taste; it is touch that determines the location
of taste. So if I put a drop of sugar solution on the right of your
tongue but place a swab on the left of your tongue, you will taste the
sugar on the left, not the right. Equally, if you taste something in
keeping with an odour, you are much more likely to perceive a smell as
arising from the mouth, considering it a taste. Ultimately, each of
these inputs influences the perception of flavour -- touch captures
taste, which then captures smell, resulting in a unified experience. The
causes of loss of smell are many. At medical school, we are taught about
the ones that are rare but important: a meningioma -- a benign tumour --
in the olfactory groove, disrupting the flow of information from the
olfactory receptors to the brain; genetic disorders that prevent the
development of any apparatus of smell -- you may recall that Paul, in
Chapter 1, has no sense of smell due to the mutation that also leaves
him unable to feel pain; a serious head injury, causing a shearing of
the small nerve fibres as they pass through the base of the skull into
the nasal cavity; or, as I have written about in my previous book The
Nocturnal Brain, as a precursor to degenerative diseases of the brain,
such as Parkinson's disease. But in reality, other more prosaic causes
are much more likely: disorders of

the nose causing inflammation or blockage to airflow; viral illnesses
directly damaging the nasal mucous membranes or the olfactory neurones
themselves; as I write, loss of sense of smell is ubiquitous as a
feature of Covid-19, a red flag to self-isolate and seek a test. The
realisation that the novel coronavirus could cause the loss of smell and
taste sent shivers through the world of neurology. Historically,
neurologists have been at the forefront of several epidemics over the
past century, viruses having an affinity for infecting and damaging the
nervous system -- infections like polio, causing paralysis in the young.
We frequently visit our long-term ventilation unit at St Thomas'
Hospital, seeing patients with chronic conditions of the muscles or
nerves causing weakness of the muscles used in breathing. Until only a
few years ago, at the entrance to the unit there was a huge, steel,
coffin-like apparatus, like a one-man submarine, fixed to a bed frame.
On either side were chrome ports, like nautical portholes, where hands
could be inserted. At one end was a flexible seal, for the head to stick
out of, and within this monstrous machine the rest of the body would be
encased. This 'iron lung' was the mainstay of keeping patients with
polio alive, fluctuations in pressure within this tube causing movement
of the chest wall when muscles could not, rendered weak and useless by
the virus. Photos from the 1950s show huge, warehouse-like wards filled
with row upon row of iron lungs, heads of the afflicted sticking out at
one end, mirrors perched above their faces so they could see around
them. There were other neurological epidemics, too, like encephalitis
lethargica, which killed about 1.6 million people over a decade during
and after the First World War. This mysterious illness, perhaps related
to the Spanish flu epidemic, disappeared as mysteriously as it came,
leaving behind not only the dead but also some 5 million survivors
ravaged by the condition, with symptoms similar to Parkinson's disease
as well as profound sleepiness and psychiatric problems. And so the fact
that this new virus, Covid-19, also seemed to have a predilection for
nerve cells -- the olfactory receptor neurones -- raised the spectre of
an impending neurological catastrophe. We had visions of explosions of
encephalitis, paralysis and other horrendous complications. Fortunately,
these apocalyptic prophesies have not been borne out. While we have seen
some neurological complications of Covid-19, the numbers of people
affected have been relatively small, and the loss of sense of smell
seems more likely

to be due to infection of cells within the olfactory epithelium rather
than the neurones themselves. While a number of viruses may enter the
brain via this route, it appears that, luckily, Covid-19 is not one of
them. This gateway that the olfactory system represents, from the
outside direct to the central nervous system, may, however, have some
broader implications. In addition to the loss of sense of smell in the
prelude to Parkinson's disease, hyposmia -- the clinical term for
reduced smell -- is a feature of other degenerative disorders of the
brain, such as Alzheimer's disease. This may of course be related to
changes in the areas of the brain responsible for smell, but evidence
points to the olfactory nerve, and the receptor neurones in the nasal
cavity, also being affected. It may be that in people at risk of
Alzheimer's, or indeed those who have it, those stem cells responsible
for the regular regeneration and replacement of these nerve cells are
less active. But the association of hyposmia with these
neurodegenerative disorders, as well as other findings, has led to a
fascinating hypothesis as to how these disorders may start. Specific
viral DNA has been found in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's
disease. The 'infectious hypothesis', as it is known, proposes that the
production of abnormal proteins resulting in nerve-cell damage is
facilitated by certain viruses from the herpes family, and that these
viruses enter the brain through the nose. The theory suggests that these
abnormal proteins, known as beta-amyloid, may have antimicrobial
functions, so the protein tangles that are the hallmark of Alzheimer's
constitute a response to viral infection. In Abi's case, however, the
cause of her inability to smell remains a mystery even now. A scan has
revealed an olfactory bulb that is smaller than normal, but it had
already been noted at an early age that she had some issues with her
nose -- her mother noticed that she snored a lot at night and an
assessment revealed extremely large adenoids. Perhaps these were
blocking the flow of odour from the mouth up to the nose, interrupting
retronasal olfaction. An operation was undertaken to remove her
adenoids, to no avail. At the age of around eleven, a further procedure
was performed to correct a deviated septum and to address some chronic
inflammation. Abi recalls visiting family in Birmingham shortly after
this second operation. 'I was playing on the trampoline with my little
cousin. He accidentally whacked me in the nose.' Later on, Abi went
inside, and went to feed her aunt's fish, a favourite activity of hers.
'I always loved feeding the fish as a

kid,' she says. 'And I smelled the fish food. I couldn't link it to
anything. It was something that wasn't just air, if that makes sense. I
wouldn't say that I could smell it, because I had no idea what it was.
It was just like if you're blind, for example, and all of a sudden you
just see a little white flash. And then it was kind of gone.' For a few
weeks subsequently, Abi thought she might be able to detect the flavour
of orange in her chocolate-orange biscuits, rather than simply the
sweetness and texture of chocolate and orange jelly, but that, too,
disappeared. Like a flash of light in the sky, when you are unsure
whether you saw a shooting star or it was simply a trick of your
imagination, Abi is uncertain if she has ever 'tasted' orange. She
wonders if her cousin's elbow to the nose may have shifted something,
perhaps dislodged some scar tissue. But Abi remains without smell, and
is acutely aware that a part of life is totally closed off to her. On
one occasion in school, her homework was to write a story based upon the
five senses. Abi protested that she could not do it as she had no
concept of smell or taste. 'So the teacher said, "Talk to your friends
about it, then." But, how could I talk to them?' She was being told to
ask a question, when she could not even grasp the language. 'I've asked
people to describe smells before, and their response is, "It is what it
is." People tell me that grass can smell. That is mad to me. Grass is
everywhere. How can you even recognise it as a smell? And when I ask
friends to describe it to me, they say, "Well, it smells like grass,
doesn't it!"' Abi's frustration is evident as we talk about this, her
inability to comprehend what is woven into the fabric of life for
everyone around her. For most of us, no interpretation is needed. Our
sense of smell is instinctive and unconscious. It is this immediacy that
perhaps explains our limitations of language to describe smells, in
contrast to those qualities of our other senses. For Abi there are
constant reminders -- her friends talking about the food in the school
canteen, the smell of the classrooms, the memories stirred by tastes and
smells of food. 'It is so constant that it is not noticed, not
appreciated, I think' -- by everyone except her. And the role of smell
as a signal of danger also has implications for Abi. A recent incident
involved something burning in the tumble dryer. 'We had billowing smoke
on the ground floor, but Abi was up in her bedroom, not aware of it at
all,' says Dawn. The house is now fitted with connected fire alarms and
gas detectors.

An inability to smell if food is past its best means Dawn has to
constantly remind Abi to check the use-by date on packaging. Social
dangers lurk as well. Another of Dawn's parenting duties is to monitor
for body odour. 'I would say, "Let me smell! Don't forget to put your
deodorant on every day!"' Essentially, Dawn is Abi's nose. I ask Abi and
Dawn about their worries for the future in a world without smell. Dawn
starts, 'I worry that I won't be here to check that she doesn't smell,
that her food is not off. And she'll get boyfriends and she will want to
wear their shirts and to know how they smell.' Abi adds, 'My best
friend, she says, "I love it when he gives me a hoodie, because it
smells like him." Why would you appreciate that? Wouldn't it just be
sweaty? But apparently it's a really nice thing to have. It links them
together almost. And I'd like to have that when I'm older.' Beyond the
role of smell in the signalling of danger, in flavour and, as Abi
implies, in memory, there is another aspect of this sense that is
undervalued -- that of human interaction, of guiding social and sexual
behaviours. The presence of volatile compounds -- odours -- in body
odour, urine, faeces or blood, can precipitate fear and vigilance in
prey species -- a warning of a predator in the environment. The
detection of chemicals marking out sick animals results in others
avoiding them, the smell of illness a powerful survival skill. While
this is appreciated in other mammals, such as dogs, in primates like
ourselves there has been an evolutionary reduction in the importance of
the olfactory system as it became increasingly expendable in the face of
the development of vision. But despite the lessening importance of smell
for our species, this sense remains unique in its direct connection to
areas of the brain fundamental to processing emotion -- the amygdala,
orbitofrontal cortex and other areas of the limbic system. And while we
are less aware of our olfactory abilities than we are of other senses,
they are nevertheless there. Recent experiments have shown that we
humans, too, are able to unconsciously recognise body odours from the
sick, to find them repulsive. It is not just danger in the form of
predators or illness that we are able to detect via smell. These
pheromones, or chemosignals, may actually be able to communicate emotion
from one individual to another; not just negative emotions, such as
fear, stress or anxiety, but also positive emotions -- happiness,
relaxation or sexual arousal. These studies tend to involve collecting
the sweat or tears of

'donors' subjected to stimuli inducing an emotional response, such as
particular videos or extreme-sports experiences. Countless studies like
this have now been done, and there are some general findings. Firstly,
women are better at interpreting emotions from these chemosignals than
men are, but we are all generally better at interpreting these signals
from members of the opposite sex than our own. The presence of
chemosignals signalling negative emotions result in changes in the
'smeller', inducing defensive patterns of behaviour, modifying appetite
for risk and influencing ability in cognition and perception. Positive
emotions are also clearly transmitted, although it seems that these are
more reliant on vision and smell in conjunction than negative emotions
are. The role of these signals in attraction and mating is also
apparent. Men smelling the tears of sad women compared to control tears
show lower levels of arousal and testosterone. Intimacy between partners
enhances the ability to detect these emotional cues. Indeed, these
chemical signals, these odours that we are perhaps unaware of, guide us
in the selection of our partners, from an evolutionary perspective our
single most important act, the choice that directs the continuation of
our genes. Despite the long history of humans trying to change or
suppress their natural odours, it seems that body odour is one of the
most significant factors in our choice of mate, even more so than
physical attractiveness. Apart from these chemicals allowing us to infer
the health of others, it appears that they also tell us something about
our potential mate's immune system. The way our bodies fight infection
is through the presentation of foreign proteins to our immune cells,
through a piece of molecular signalling called the major
histocompatibility complex, or MHC. To have parents with different forms
of MHC confirms a genetic advantage to offspring, and experiments in
mice have shown that they select mates through body-odour signals that
represent a different genetic immune status. Evidence suggests that this
mechanism arises in humans as well, at least when procreation is the
purpose. Studies have shown that women not taking hormonal
contraception, or in the most fertile phase of their menstrual cycle,
prefer the body odour of men with MHC genes different from their own or
with a broader range of MHC genes, which confers an ability to recognise
a greater variety of immune triggers. This does not appear to be the
case for women on contraceptives or for men's attraction to women,
implying heightened olfactory discrimination for genetically 'fit'

partners when a baby may result. In fact, one study has suggested that
couples struggling to conceive are more likely to be genetically
similar, from an MHC perspective, reinforcing the view that procreating
with someone with different genes from your own has an evolutionary
advantage. And it is not just genetic information that is conveyed by
our body odour. Women in the fertile phase of their cycle prefer the
sweat of men with higher testosterone levels. Scent is the secret
language to safeguard your child's genetic fitness. For females, who can
typically only pass on their genes to one child at a time, this is of
utmost importance. But it is also the language of sexual attraction
independent of procreation. Emerging evidence suggests that there are
not only differences between the sexes when it comes to response to body
odour, but also differences related to sexual orientation. Differences
in response to single molecules in body fluids, such as male or female
sex hormones, are consistently seen between both heterosexual and
homosexual subjects. For example, gay men appear to exhibit higher
sensitivity for androstenone -- a pheromone sometimes used by farmers to
encourage pigs to mate -- than heterosexual men do. Even more
astonishing is the finding that smell appears to convey whether someone
is a potential sexual partner. One study has reported that gay men
presented with body odour from heterosexual men respond differently,
implying that body odour may even act as a warning in order to avoid
attraction to individuals who are incompatible based upon sexual
orientation. Thus it is clear that our sense of smell extends far beyond
the ability to distinguish a rose from a jasmine flower, or a lemon from
an orange. Its role in more fundamental aspects of our behaviour, of our
basic instincts, is clear. This sense is so ancient that it even enables
communication not just within a species but between species -- animals
such as dogs and horses can pick up on these olfactory clues, detecting
emotional state or disease in humans. Examples abound, like dogs trained
to detect Parkinson's disease or Covid-19. And it all happens without
awareness, a subconscious process invisible to us in our daily lives.
Smell is without doubt a primaeval sense, old in evolutionary terms,
primitive, and of fundamental importance to our survival.

Abi is awaiting another procedure on her nose, to see if smell can be
induced. No one can tell her if this is feasible, but personally I am a
little pessimistic. To regain a sense that you have lost must
intuitively be easier than to gain one you never had. I am drawn to
comparisons with vision. If visual problems in early life are not
corrected, then the visual system does not develop properly, preventing
vision from ever being fully restored. The small olfactory bulb evident
on Abi's scans imply, to me, that this aspect of her nervous system has
never fully developed in the absence of olfactory stimuli. Even if a
good flow of air to the olfactory receptors is achieved, I am doubtful
that she will ever smell in a normal way, although I would be delighted
to be proven wrong. Even if Abi's smell is regained, the past is lost
for ever. Her mother, Dawn, says, 'I can go out and I can smell a smell
and it takes me straight back. We're in the country, so sometimes I go
past a house and I smell burning wood. My grandparents were Irish, and
when I used to go over to Ireland we'd get close to their house and I
could always smell their burning fire. And if I smell that smell, it
takes me straight back to a place and a time. And that's one of the
things for Abi -- she hasn't got that. Hopefully she'll be able to make
those memories but, you know, she won't smell a perfume when she's older
and think, "Oh, God, that reminds me of Mum." And baking apples won't
take her back to her nan's kitchen. I just like to think that some day
she'll be able to make new memories.' I consider my own smell memories.
The Arabic coffee brewing in my grandparents' kitchen, the scent of a
pile of damp autumn leaves and smoky garden fires, my German
grandfather's eau de cologne, the flavour of my grandmother's
Pflaumenkuchen. Another of my earliest memories is of sitting on the low
wall of my kindergarten playground with my best friend. I must have been
three or four at the time. Beyond the wall, the flowerbed was filled
with small round pebbles of different shades of brown and cream. We
would plunge our hands in, clutch several stones, and rub them
vigorously against the bricks of the wall. With the pebbles warmed by
friction, we would hold them under our noses, each pebble exuding a
sweet earthiness, each shade a subtly different odour. Mundanity
rendered memorable by smell. Memories of childhood associated with
happiness or contentment, far easier to conjure than visual images or
the sounds of

voices, more directly linked with an emotional response. How can I say
that smell and taste are the least important of the senses? I cannot.
For they link our survival, our memories, our emotions, our ties to our
loved ones, in the present and in the past. OceanofPDF.com

7 ON THE MERRY-GO-ROUND

'We have five senses in which we glory and which we recognise and
celebrate, senses that constitute the sensible world for us. But there
are other senses -- secret senses, sixth senses, if you will -- equally
vital, but unrecognised, and unlauded. These senses, unconscious,
automatic, had to be discovered.' Oliver Sacks, The Man Who Mistook His
Wife for a Hat

'I could hear my eyeballs moving, squashing around. As I looked left to
right, I could hear the eyeball moving and squelching,' Mark tells me,
as he sits in front of me. A big, jovial man, just turned fifty years
old, he seems like the kind of bloke who would be centre of attention in
the pub, regaling his friends with anecdotes and jokes, gesticulating
wildly. But as he tells me his story, I can see him shrinking into
himself, almost physically occupying less space in the room. 'It
probably started seven years ago. I noticed one day that my ears felt
really full, like I was in a bubble. You know when you go on an airplane
and you come down and your ears are still popping? That was the
sensation.' He thought nothing more of it initially, expecting the
feeling to go as suddenly and mysteriously as it came. But it did not.
Instead, that sensation got worse. Mark went to his doctor and was told
that the problem with his ears may simply be the result of a cold, that
it would settle with time. Mark's response was typically phlegmatic --
'Fair enough!' But about a year on, he began to notice other things too.
'One thing that was really weird was that I could hear my footsteps.
When your foot is going down, you're feeling it going up into your head,
and it feels like a bang. The noise is echoing in your head.' As the
days and weeks passed, Mark's symptoms got gradually worse. No longer
just a curiosity, the change in his hearing began to seriously

affect his life. 'I quite like going out socially,' he says, confirming
my first impressions of him. 'I used to go out with all my school
friends on a Friday night, to the pub. But I was finding that I couldn't
actually hear what they were saying. All I was picking up was loads of
background noise. And if anyone put music on, my head would just be
spinning.' I ask him to clarify what he means by this -- is it a
sensation of physical movement induced by loud noise, or is it just
sensory overload? 'It was just too much. I just felt I was being hit in
every direction by every sound. And I began to hear sounds that I would
never have thought of before.' Like his eyeballs moving, his footsteps,
his joints clicking, stomach rumbling. 'I could hear myself swallow all
the time. I could hear myself breathing.' Eating, too, was a challenge.
'If I'd eat a packet of crisps, I couldn't hear anything else. Don't
have a conversation with me when I'm eating a packet of crisps, because
I'd ignore you. All I could hear was the crunching. I found that with
toast as well.' The fullness of the ears persisted, making Mark feel
like he was in a bubble. When out and about, he would focus on the
acoustics of rooms he entered. High ceilings, echoey environments, all
would exacerbate the echoing of his own voice or those of others in his
head. 'It felt like my head was going to explode. The amount that was
going in my head was probably ten or twenty times what a normal person
was hearing. Even when I was talking to people, I would lose where I
was.' Mark's change in hearing began to take its toll. Unlike the
age-related hearing loss I described in Chapter 4, Mark could hear more,
rather than less. But this gain in function had a similar effect -- the
drowning out of what he wanted to hear pushed him towards social
isolation. 'I didn't want to go out. I was making excuses about not
going to the pub, because there's nothing worse than not being able to
hear anyone.' I ask him if he talked to his friends and family about it,
or simply swept it under the carpet. 'I've always been very positive,
but I was struggling with it. I'm not sure if it is a male thing, but I
didn't really want to say too much, even to my family. I made excuses --
too much work, and things like that.' Slowly but surely, various aspects
of his life were stripped away. Concerts went unattended. Walking down
the street was avoided for fear of hearing drivers tooting their car
horns. A reluctance to walk the dog, its bark now painful to hear. 'Most
disturbing were car alarms, or, where I

work, fire alarms going off. People scraping their shoes, metal on
metal.' And with it, his mental health suffered too. Despite knowing
that this was something to do with his ears, he could not help but doubt
his own sanity. 'Was it me perhaps going a bit mad?' he recalls,
questioning himself. Eventually, after several months of living in a
deafening hell, Mark got to see a hearing specialist. Scans, endoscopies
and hearing tests followed. 'I've done so many hearing tests! But when
it is a quiet room, my hearing is really good! My tests were coming back
strong. When you add something in the background, that's when my hearing
totally goes.' The first diagnosis was enlarged adenoids, which were
removed. The second was Eustachian tube dysfunction -- an issue with the
tube that connects the middle ear to the throat, which should open to
equalise pressure in front of and behind the eardrum. But no treatments
worked, and Mark's frustration grew. 'I probably felt the lowest I've
ever felt. And I've already mentioned I'm quite a positive, upbeat
person, probably the most out of all my friends. And I couldn't quite
register how I was going to have to live with this for the rest of my
life.' Even at home, there was no respite; his children shouting or his
wife coughing -- a torture chamber. In desperation, he sought out a
second opinion, then a third. But answers were not forthcoming, and it
was suggested he tried hearing aids. 'They were amazing!' he says; they
had Bluetooth connectivity and were miniscule in size. But despite the
technology and the high costs, they only succeeded in amplifying
background noises even further. 'I tried them for a couple of months and
persisted, because they're not cheap! But to no avail, and I had to take
them out. The good news is I gave them to my mum, who had NHS ones,' he
chuckles. Having been on this unrewarding medical merry-go-round for a
year or two now, his luck eventually changed. Having been previously
told that there was nothing more to be done, a last-ditch effort was to
consult a super-specialist. His heart fell when he was told that he
would have more hearing tests -- this would be the fourth or fifth time
going through the same process. But this time the outcome was different.
Rather than simply playing pure tones, there were background noises too.
'I remember one tone, a really high-pitched one -- I literally fell off
the chair.' He recalls the subsequent review. 'The doctor said, "We know
what it is." I got very emotional, really quite tearful. She said,
"It's..."' -- at this point Mark slows

down and, having stumbled over the pronunciation of it a couple of
times, carefully enunciates each syllable, pausing after each word, as
if stressing the importance of it in his life -- '"superior canal
dehiscence syndrome".' While Mark's major problem is his hearing --
making out the voices of his family and friends, being overcome by the
cacophony of sounds emanating from his own body -- he also reports some
other rather curious symptoms. Throughout our discussion of his
experiences there are a few, almost throwaway, comments that illustrate
something really rather important. We've already seen that the process
of turning sound into hearing is reliant on both the ear and the nervous
system, and that the inner ear's function and structure are intimately
interdependent. The basilar membrane, its shape, its rigidity; the size
and length of the cochlear tube; the tiny series of bones in the middle
ear, evolved to transmit a range of frequencies from air to fluid; the
shape of the pinna, the outer ear, the whorls and ridges facilitating
directional hearing -- all are crucial to the conversion of vibrations
in the air. But Mark reveals something else about the structure of the
inner ear, something that we know theoretically but is not always
apparent to us. When Mark talks about his symptoms at the height of
their intensity, he tells me something very curious. At one point he
says, 'That was the thing about very loud noises. They really upset my
balance.' So, Mark was sent to a specialist balance clinic, where they
conducted another hearing test. Mark's response to certain tones was
dramatic, as we have heard, falling off his chair on that occasion.
Scraping noises in particular, metal on metal, would be most certain to
make him feel unbalanced. We all know that our ears are intrinsic to our
sense of balance, crucial to our knowledge of our motion through space.
But this knowledge is gleaned from biology lessons, books or lectures in
medical school. On a day-to-day level, however, we have no direct,
tangible knowledge of this. There is no clear correlation between the
organ and its balance function, much like our understanding that our
thoughts originate in our brains and that our blood pressure is a
function of our hearts. Our experiences tell us that our eyes see and
our fingers feel -- close your eyes, cover your ears, wear gloves, and
those senses are modulated, dulled or eliminated. But when it comes to
this relationship between balance and our ears, we are very much in the
dark,

like the ancient Greeks and their understanding of anatomy and
physiology -- they assumed that the function of the brain was to cool
the heart, and that the heart controlled our thoughts, sensations and
movements. However, what Mark describes is clearly a direct link between
sounds and our sensation of movement, an inkling of the close structural
and functional apposition of hearing and balance. For how else would we
explain Mark falling off his chair in response to a particular loud
sound?

Figure 5. Above: illustration of the ear, showing the relationship
between the external, middle and inner ear. Below: detailed view of the
inner ear, demonstrating the close apposition of the cochlea,
responsible for converting sound energy to impulses, with the vestibular
system. The semicircular canals detect rotation of the head, while the
utricle and saccule detect linear acceleration and head tilt.

Direct examination of the inner ear clearly demonstrates why hearing and
balance should be linked. The cochlea sits deep within the temporal bone
in the base of the skull, a hollowed-out curled space within the solid
bone. This bony labyrinth, however, extends beyond the cochlea itself,
and encompasses other fluid-filled cavities. The snail-like structure of
the cochlea is contiguous with small outpouchings responsible for
detecting movement of the head in space and three loop-like structures
all orientated perpendicular to each other -- the semicircular canals.
Rotation of the head in any direction results in a shift of the fluid
lining these canals, detected by hair cells similar to those in the
cochlea. Under normal circumstances, sound energy should not enter the
semicircular canals and should not, therefore, precipitate a feeling of
movement or rotation. But in Mark's case, something is obviously
facilitating the spread of sound energy into an area of the inner ear
where it should not go. The answer comes from an unlikely origin --
Italian pigeons. In the late 1920s, Professor Pietro Tullio was working
in the Laboratory of Experimental Physiology in Bologna. Inspired by
earlier discoveries of French pigeons making sudden head movements when
their inner ears were damaged surgically, he began to experiment on
their Italian cousins. Opening up their semicircular canals, essentially
disrupting the structural integrity of the bony labyrinth, resulted in
sounds inducing abnormal eye and head movements. The parallel
phenomenon, sounds inducing eye movements or a sensation of spinning in
humans, was subsequently named the Tullio phenomenon. People
experiencing this rare, but extremely striking condition will describe
falling over when a police car drives past with its sirens on or
profound dizziness triggered by a plane overhead. Originally considered
to be a sign of congenital syphilis -- the bacterium of the disease
passed from mother to child would cause infection of the bone around the
labyrinth -- we now understand that this phenomenon can occur in a range
of conditions in which typically, but not exclusively, a window to sound
energy is opened onto the labyrinth. And indeed, the most common cause
of the Tullio phenomenon is 'superior canal dehiscence syndrome' (SCDS).
I say common, but it is actually almost entirely unknown, at least among
non-specialists. The condition was only described at the turn of this
century, some seventy years after Tullio's experiments. In 1998, a
seminal paper

described a series of patients with chronic imbalance and sound- or
pressure-induced spinning sensations and uncontrolled eye movements.
Detailed imaging of the inner ear (the resolution of such techniques
improving at around this time) revealed a thinning or breach of the bony
lining of the superior canal -- one of the semi-circular canals of the
inner ear. Borrowing a botanical term, dehiscence -- meaning the
splitting-open of a seed pod -- this condition was named superior canal
dehiscence syndrome. The cause of this bony defect remains a mystery
some twenty years later, with some researchers postulating a weakness in
the bone that is present from birth while others note an association
with some form of injury, like head trauma or being subjected to high
pressure like the Valsalva manoeuvre -- holding your nose and mouth
closed against exhalation to 'pop' your ears. Regardless of the
underlying cause, this defect in the bony wall of the inner ear not only
allows sound energy to stimulate movement sensors in the inner ear, but
also provides a shortcut for that sound energy from outside the ear to
enter into the cochlea. Under normal circumstances, as we have seen,
sound energy from the air is transmitted into the cochlea through the
small bones -- the ossicles -- of the middle ear, an efficient mechanism
that also allows some regulation. The stapedius, that tiny muscle that
is activated with loud noises or when we speak, dampens down
transmission of some sounds. But in the presence of an alternate pathway
for sound, this mechanism does not work. Sound is unfiltered,
unregulated, as it passes directly from the skull into the inner ear.
The middle ear -- the eardrum, the ossicles and stapedius -- are
bypassed. Like dolphins, we end up hearing more through our jaws or our
skulls than we do through our middle ear. This disrupts our hearing, but
also results in 'bone hyperacusis' -- hearing one's own voice very
loudly and distorted, hearing your pulse or the internal sounds of your
own body, such as a rumbling stomach, eye movements, breathing,
footsteps or chewing. Exactly like Mark. Mark remembers saying to his
specialist that it was wonderful to know what the problem was, but
asking if there was anything that could be done. 'It's very rare,' he
was told. 'But the good news is that, only in the last few years,
surgery for it has become possible. And there are two people in the
country that can operate.' And so Mark found himself in a room with a
surgeon, who asked him all the right questions. 'This is really good, I

thought. He clearly knows what this is about. I got quite tearful. So
many years I've gone through this, and now finally someone can actually
help.' There is no non-surgical treatment for SCDS, at least not at the
moment. The surgeons who originally described the condition also
reported surgical procedures to plug the breach in the bone using bone
dust or bone chips. The reported outcomes are good, although some
patients experience hearing loss, and recurrence is possible. Like those
early patients, an operation to seal the hole in Mark's ear was
proposed, and the day finally came. I ask him if he was apprehensive. 'I
was full of hope. There was no worry there at all. I felt like I was in
a safe pair of hands.' Mark recalls waking up on the ward. In his
excitement, the first thing he did was to call his wife and sister, but
it later became clear that his conversation had been garbled and
confused. 'And all this food came in afterwards,' he tells me. 'And I
asked who had ordered it. "You ordered everything on the menu!" and I
couldn't remember anything!' he laughs. A day later, he was out of
hospital, but the ear was swollen, his head swathed like a mummy, in
huge bandages. From the first hour awake after surgery, Mark remembers
constantly wondering if he could notice a difference, trying to convince
himself that the operation had been a success. It was when he got home
that he had the first inkling that the surgery had been worthwhile. With
all the well-wishers visiting, the chatting and laughter no longer
seemed intolerable. 'I wasn't getting that real buzzing in my head. I
could deal with everyone talking.' The real test for Mark was about one
month after surgery. 'I went to the pub, just to try. I wanted everyone
there.' And as the banter started up, Mark realised that he could hear
again, that he was no longer deafened by the auditory chaos of his
friends. The echoing, the wall of noise, was almost gone -- 'Not 100 per
cent, but probably 80--90 per cent, which I would have taken any day of
the week.' Sitting around a table with his friends, a pint in his hand,
Mark could hear the conversation again. I ask him how he felt at that
moment. 'Brilliant!' he beams. 'Absolutely brilliant! My social side
came out again.' From hiding away from the world, within a few weeks he
had flown off to Italy to be best man at a wedding. The flight, the
speech, the party, all went without a hitch. 'I think that gave me a big
lift,' he tells me.

Since that operation, some two years ago, Mark's life has returned to
normal -- more or less. There have been some ups and downs. Mark is
waiting to go back to see the surgeon, as in the past few months, that
feeling of fullness in his ears is returning. He says it's not as bad as
it was, but there's a hint of deterioration. Mark is philosophical. 'I
still feel lucky where I am. If we need to go back for an operation
again, I would do it tomorrow.' I ask him whether his experiences have
changed his understanding of life. 'I've taken for granted my hearing.
But when you can't hear, you do start withdrawing from people, you do go
into a depressive state. It's something that no one can see in you. They
all thought, "Good old Mark, he's a laugh." But deep down I was really
struggling.' Later he says, 'The thing is, I was never diagnosed with
depression. It's only when I look back -- that's when I see the
depression. I probably put up with it in silence. I didn't share it with
anyone, really. I don't think people knew how I felt at all. I was that
guy that was always smiley, happy.' And as I chat to him, the confident,
ebullient man sitting before me, I can still see small glimpses of the
loneliness and isolation that his hearing problems brought him, and the
joy of its return to something approaching normality. We speak of the
five senses, but of course this is a gross over-simplification. Other
species clearly have other senses, like the lateral line of fish, a
system that enables them to detect subtle perturbations of water current
indicative of prey or predators, the pit organs of snakes, allowing them
to detect heat radiation, or bird species able to perceive the Earth's
magnetic field. In humans, proprioception, these sense of where our
bodies are in space and where our body parts are in relation to each
other, as was lost by Rahel due to her lung cancer (see Chapter 1), has
been described by some as a sixth sense, although to my mind this is
simply an unconscious modality of touch. However you define them, it is
clear that Aristotle's view of the five senses -- a view that we hold on
to today, some two millennia later -- is incorrect. Ask anyone who has
ever experienced seasickness, or staggered off a rollercoaster with that
profound nauseating feeling of constant movement even after you have
reached terra firma. Knowing which way is up, which way is down, or
perceiving how our heads are moving in space,

is fundamental to our lives. It permits us to walk in a straight line,
to stand against gravity. At its most basic, even being able to see
clearly is dependent on this sense. Consider walking down the street,
your head moving up and down, tilting forward or back, side to side. Our
visual field should be jiggling all over the place, juddering furiously
as we walk or run. But it doesn't; it remains firmly fixed in place,
allowing us to focus on the person's face strolling down the pavement
towards us. And this is all down to the inner ear, thanks to direct
connections between the vestibular system and the motor supply to the
muscles of the eyeballs, a reflex maintaining the eyeball in position
despite the movements of the head in space. This is referred to as the
doll's eye reflex, like the children's toy whose eyes remain pointing in
the same direction relative to gravity, making them appear to close when
you lie the doll down. Nothing illustrates the importance of balance
more than when it goes wrong. My shoes bear testimony to that. One of
the most common balance conditions we see in the neurology clinic is
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, or BPPV. Vertigo in the medical
sense defines the sensation of movement when there is none, very
different to fear of heights. Individuals with BPPV will often
experience a profound sense of dizziness or spinning triggered by small
head movements or rolling over in bed. The cause is something overtly
insignificant -- small solid particles in the fluid that fills the
semicircular canals of the inner ear. When the head moves, the fluid
inside the ear moves, but as the head stops, the fluid no longer moves.
However, any solid particles will continue to drift, giving the illusion
of movement, which is extremely disconcerting and unpleasant. In some
respects, someone with BPPV is a godsend in the midst of a busy clinic
-- a simple manoeuvre on the examination couch can usually diagnose and
treat the condition in five minutes flat. There are very few instant
hits in the world of neurology, but this is one of them. The downside to
this manoeuvre is that it precipitates the very spinning that has
brought the person into clinic in the first place; I have learned not to
let the patient grip my arm, after the first few times of having nail
imprints on my wrist as the patient clutches on for dear life while the
world spins around them. And after the first time of having my shoes
covered in vomit, I have also learned to stand well back and keep a bowl
to hand.

Sometimes, however, vertigo can strike even without a trigger such as
turning your head or looking up. And Kelly knows exactly how devastating
that is. Sitting in front of me, she looks healthy, full of life,
relaxed and confident. In her early thirties, she looks younger, with a
long mane of blond hair and fashionable thick-rimmed glasses. Like Mark,
she laughs easily, even though her condition is no laughing matter. 'It
all started in 2014. I was sat at my desk at work. I was in recruitment,
so it's really fast-paced. And I was staring at my screen and everything
just started spinning. So I'd no idea what was going on. And then it
stopped. And I thought nothing of it and just carried on, as you do,'
she chuckles. She remembers the episode lasting a second, over so
quickly it was difficult to know what to make of it. She thought she had
just not drunk enough water, or hadn't eaten enough, and just carried
on. Over the next few weeks, however, it happened a few more times. 'The
world was spinning round me,' she recalls. 'I was hanging on to the
chair for dear life!' And these attacks began to happen while she was
standing up or walking down the road. 'It would start with really loud
tinnitus in my left ear, like a very loud constant beeping.' She mimics
a high-pitched tone, prolonged and grating. 'And then my ears would fill
up -- like when you are on a flight and you can't hear -- and then I
would fall straight to the floor. It was very scary.' I ask her if at
that point she had any idea what was going on. 'No, not a clue. I went
to the GP and they gave me some tablets for dizziness. They thought I
had labyrinthitis.' Labyrinthitis is essentially the default diagnosis
for anyone with dizziness. It is a catch-all term, used and abused, but
is thought to represent infection or inflammation of the labyrinth, the
bony canals of the inner ear, causing disruption to hearing and balance,
and resulting in nausea and vomiting. Often presumed to be due to a
viral infection, the term is often used interchangeably with vestibular
neuronitis, inflammation of the nerve to the labyrinth, and manifests in
the same way. While no one could accuse Kelly's condition of not being
dramatic, labyrinthitis is even more so, with the afflicted suffering
profound constant spinning, extreme vomiting and being unable to get out
of bed for several days before their condition gradually improves. Not
at all what Kelly was experiencing. 'So, I took those tablets for a few
weeks. They didn't work. I'd walk out of my house and fall to the floor.
I remember chatting to my neighbour and having to try

and wobble my way back to my house without falling over in the street. I
literally fell through my front door.' As time passed, Kelly's episodes
grew longer and more frequent. Three or four times per week, for five or
six hours at a time. There was nothing to do but wait it out. 'I would
be sat on the floor, being sick. Once everything started spinning, there
would be nothing you could do. Strangely, being sick would give me a few
seconds of relief.' Her symptoms quickly began to dominate her life. The
tinnitus started to occur between these attacks as well, and after the
attacks she would lose some of her hearing for a short while. If she
used her phone on the left ear it would be very muffled, yet it remained
crystal clear on the right. Kelly returned to her doctor, who then
thought she might have an ear infection. She was prescribed antibiotics,
again to no avail. 'I remember at this point it must have been my fifth
GP visit. I was in tears, saying there is something wrong, and whatever
you're telling me isn't right.' A third diagnosis was forthcoming --
MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease. Kelly recalls, 'They told me to take these tablets --
betahistine -- and see if it worked. They then sent me home again.' I
can hear the resentment in her voice, the clear feeling that these
horrific-sounding symptoms were not being taken seriously, that she
herself was not being taken seriously. I ask her if the new medication
worked. She laughs. 'No, unfortunately!' I tell her I imagine she was
not laughing at the time. 'I was not! I laugh now because I realize that
I'm not the only person that has been through this. You hear me laughing
a lot, but that's the only way you can get through it. Otherwise you
just end up sad and upset all the time. At that moment, you feel very
alone, very isolated. I was twenty-seven; I had never had anything like
this. I've never really had vertigo, or dizziness. You know when you
were a child and you went to a park, and you all got onto one of those
merry-go-rounds, and your friends would spin you and spin you and spin
you. And then you would get off it and you'd be walking -- you can't
walk straight, and you end up falling on the floor because everything is
spinning? But that stops within a couple of minutes, even less than
that. Not this -- this carries on and is ten times worse, and it can
last hours. That feeling of no control of your body, basically.' Five
months on, Kelly was back at her doctor's. She had not been to work for
most of that time. An attack on the Underground had left her stuck

on the Tube platform for three hours. Kelly had got off one Tube train
and was walking to another line. 'I started having to hang on to the
walls as I walked,' she tells me. 'I didn't make it onto the next train.
I made it to the platform and collapsed on the floor.' A passer-by, who
Kelly assumes to have been a doctor, stopped and called for an
ambulance; Kelly recalls lots of people walking by, assuming she was
drunk, despite it being 8.30 a.m. Help in the form of an ambulance crew
was unfortunately not forthcoming, as Kelly was not deemed an emergency.
She remembers eventually having been taken to hospital by a British
Transport police officer in a taxi. It was after this incident that her
GP finally referred her to a specialist. But Kelly snapped when she
found out she would have to wait three months for this appointment.
'After a week, I called up the hospital, spoke to the Ear, Nose and
Throat secretaries, and basically burst out crying, telling them I had
no life. I was stuck at home. I couldn't do anything. I was completely
isolated. I had no independence. At this point, I knew I was going to
lose my job. I needed to see someone and find out what was going on. And
the lady I spoke to was absolutely incredible. She got me an appointment
the next day. It gives me goosebumps thinking about it.' The following
day, sitting in the clinic, Kelly got some unexpected news. The GP had
been correct in the final diagnosis offered, despite the lack of
response to medications. 'The consultant said that I had typical
symptoms of MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease.' The Paris of the mid-nineteenth century
was a hotbed of advancement in the medical sciences. In one corner of
the city, at the quackery end of the spectrum, the followers of Franz
Mesmer, the German physician who espoused animal magnetism and had
passed briefly through Paris, practised mesmerism. But elsewhere in the
city, huge strides were being made in crafting a scientific method to
the practice of medicine. An innovative group of physicians had
developed a framework for teaching and research at the turn of the
century, setting the stage for the advancements to come. War with the
British, and resultant blockades preventing the importation of
substances from the tropics, kickstarted the local pharmaceutical
industry and had led to the discovery of strychnine, quinine, caffeine
and codeine. RenÃ© Laennec had been lauded for the invention of the
stethoscope in 1816,

and the introduction of auscultation -- listening through his device --
into clinical practice. By 1857, Louis Pasteur had moved to the city
from Lille and had already begun to work on fermentation and the germ
theory of disease. In the world of neurology, meanwhile, Jean-Martin
Charcot, one of the founding fathers of the modern speciality, had begun
his career as a physician and was soon to be appointed a professor at
the University of Paris. It was he who laid the foundations for
neurological clinical examination, describing countless neurological
disorders, including multiple sclerosis and motor neurone disease. The
list of Charcot's acolytes is a Who's Who of neurology, names instantly
recognisable to most doctors. It was into this brave new medical world,
in 1861, that Prosper MÃ©niÃ¨re took his first steps, at the tender age of
sixty-one. To describe him as a wide-eyed ingenue is perhaps a little
unfair. By this time, MÃ©niÃ¨re was already a respected physician in
Paris, the director of the Imperial Institute for Deaf-Mutes, but in
some respects he was not an accepted member of the medical
establishment. On two separate occasions he had tried to join the
Imperial Academy of Medicine, but had failed to muster sufficient votes
for election. It was in January of that year that MÃ©niÃ¨re stepped behind
the podium at the academy that had thus far shunned him, to present a
paper. By some accounts, it was a miserable day outside, bitterly cold
and raining hard, and few had turned up to attend his lecture. The scant
audience that had appeared showed little interest in what he had to say,
and, to add insult to injury, MÃ©niÃ¨re was not permitted to engage in the
discussion afterwards, having failed to be elected a member of the
institution. At the time, vertigo -- the sensation of spinning or
movement -- was thought to be brain-related. Termed 'apoplectic cerebral
congestion', it was presumed, like strokes and seizures, to be caused by
the overfilling of the blood vessels in the brain and was treated by
bleeding, cupping, purging or the application of leeches. Other gruesome
treatments in use at the time included setons -- large, curved needles
threaded with string, left in the neck. After a few days, the string
would cause suppuration (the formation of pus), which was considered to
draw out inflammation. In his presentation of his paper, MÃ©niÃ¨re
controversially proposed an alternative explanation for vertigo.
Referring to his patients at the Institute for Deaf-Mutes, he described
those who had developed sudden deafness

and vertigo after a foreign object had been inserted into the ear, and
others in whom hearing loss and tinnitus developed hand in hand with
vertigo. He concluded that vertigo may actually originate from the ear
rather than the brain. Perhaps most convincing was his description of a
young girl who had presented with extremely sudden vertigo and hearing
loss, and died a short while later. At the autopsy, her brain and spinal
cord were found to be intact, but within the inner ear was evidence of
bleeding, with blood filling the semi-circular canals rather than the
cochlea. This unfortunate child -- in hindsight probably suffering from
acute leukaemia, leaving her at risk of spontaneous haemorrhage --
constituted the most direct evidence to refute previous views of the
origins of vertigo. On the day of his presentation, MÃ©niÃ¨re's views were
largely ignored, but they were resurrected the following week by a
figure more closely associated with the establishment, and a member of
the Academy, who cited his paper while talking about epilepsy. The
resulting controversy raged for weeks, until the academician had had
enough and withdrew from the debate. Disenchanted, MÃ©niÃ¨re nonetheless
persisted in his collection of cases, and published regularly until his
death of influenza in February 1862, some thirteen months after his
controversial paper. Although dismissed and rejected by his
contemporaries, MÃ©niÃ¨re's name lives on ever more in his eponymous
disease. While we now clearly understand that vertigo may originate from
the ear (it can of course also result from the brain, in the cases of
migraine or stroke, for example), there remains some mystery regarding
the underlying cause of MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease. The condition manifests just
as Kelly describes, with spontaneous episodes of spinning lasting from a
few minutes up to twenty-four hours, as well as fluctuating hearing
loss, ringing in the ears and a feeling of pressure in the ear. The
disease is often correlated with the accumulation of endolymph -- the
fluid filling the cochlea and vestibular system in the inner ear -- but
the relationship between this fluid build-up and the disease is not
fully understood: people can develop this same build-up of endolymph
without any symptoms at all. And the reason for this accumulation of
fluid in the first place is unclear, although it is presumably related
to either too much production of the fluid or too little absorption.
MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease is considered a disorder of middle age, but can occur
in children as young as

four years old and in the elderly. Genetic, cellular and anatomical
factors are all thought to contribute. Why this build-up of fluid,
termed 'endolymphatic hydrops', should result in such symptoms is only a
little better understood. Accumulation of fluid causes the basilar
membrane in the cochlea -- the location of the hair cells -- to bulge,
causing changes to sound transmission and detection within the inner
ear, and resultant hearing loss. But the reason for the tinnitus and
vertigo is more uncertain. Some studies suggest that MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease
also results in damage to the nerve fibres conducting information from
the inner ear. It has also been suggested that rupture of the membranes
of the inner ear can lead to leakage of endolymph, whose high potassium
levels can cause nerve fibres to fire spontaneously. For Kelly, and for
others with the condition, one of the most disabling features is the
presence of drop attacks or 'Tumarkin otolithic crises'. Kelly describes
scenarios where, without warning, she finds herself on the floor. There
is no loss of consciousness, but equally no vertigo or imbalance
beforehand. It is as if she is struck to the ground by an invisible
hand, out of the blue, one moment walking along the street, the next
moment spreadeagled on the paving stones. So striking are these
collapses that I have seen several people with MÃ©niÃ¨re's mistakenly
referred to my epilepsy clinic, their doctors at a loss to explain why
this person with intermittent vertigo may suddenly drop to the floor.
The cause is thought to result from a sudden dysfunction of the
gravity-sensing organs of the inner ear. Kelly was put back on
betahistine tablets. She recalls that the surgeon also proposed some
intra-tympanic steroid injections -- passing a hypodermic needle through
the eardrum, injecting steroid directly into the middle ear. 'It hurt a
lot,' Kelly chuckles. 'It wasn't so much the needle going through, but
the liquid inside. Your ear feels raw. It was the most painful thing
I've ever felt.' I almost feel uncomfortable doing so, as I suspect I
know the answer, but I ask if these injections helped. 'No,' she laughs.
'I had three sets of them every two weeks, but they didn't really help.'
Throughout this time, even with a firm diagnosis, her life had come to a
standstill. Her mother, living abroad, was flying back and forth to look
after her. 'I wasn't allowed to go out on my own; I had to have someone
with me the whole time. I wasn't allowed to go to the toilet and lock
the door; if something happened in the toilet, no one would be able to
get in

there and help me. Basically, I was twenty-seven with no life.' Over a
period of a few months, Kelly had gone from having a normal, active
lifestyle to being housebound. After eighteen months of suffering with
the condition, she lost her job. She admits it was a bit of a relief.
'It actually helped me, because I didn't have the stress of constantly
having to say that I can't come in this month.' She was fitted with a
grommet -- a small plastic tube to maintain a hole in the eardrum,
allowing air to pass in and out of the middle ear -- in an attempt to
help. Whether by coincidence or due to the surgery, it was shortly after
the procedure that Kelly began to see some signs of recovery. Kelly went
back to work but, recognising that stress was a significant trigger for
her, in a limited and junior capacity. Gradually, some semblance of
normality returned, but while she still gets dizzy spells -- 'If I'm
stressed, I'll be on the floor' -- they are rarer now. She still gets
the tinnitus, too, but intermittently rather than continuously. 'I've
lost a lot of hearing in my left ear, so I do have a hearing aid now --
when I remember to wear it!' she scoffs. 'When it's really busy around
me, if I put it in I can actually hear someone talking to me, whereas
otherwise I'm lip-reading. And according to my parents, if I have the
hearing aid in I speak at a normal level. I don't shout.' Kelly works
part-time now, and was mainly working from home even before the Covid-19
crisis. She has also moved out of London, where it is quieter. The lack
of hustle and bustle has made life easier. I ask her if she still has a
nightlife. 'I still go out, but I don't drink. The last thing I want to
feel is drunk, when I feel that normally anyway!' What is clear is that
there remain as many unknowns about the treatment of MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease
as there are about the cause. Migraine often complicates MÃ©niÃ¨re's
disease, as it does in Kelly's case. Management of stress levels, and
other lifestyle factors such as sleep and alcohol intake, may well help
both migraine and the symptoms of MÃ©niÃ¨re's. Specific treatments are
more hit-and-miss. Betahistine, the drug prescribed for Kelly,
suppresses an overactive vestibular system and may improve blood flow to
the cochlea, but ultimately the precise way it works is unknown. The
inner ear can absorb substances from the middle ear, hence the
injections of steroids through Kelly's eardrum. These procedures may
reduce the number of spells of vertigo but do not eliminate them. More
aggressive treatments

have been tried, such as decompression of the inner ear, the insertion
of shunts to drain endolymph, or even complete destruction of the
balancesensing organs of the inner ear or the nerve, with variable
outcomes. There remains uncertainty as to whether some of these
treatments ultimately alter the natural progression of the disease. The
insertion of a grommet into Kelly's ear appeared to help, but is
certainly not universally accepted as a treatment for MÃ©niÃ¨re's. Some
surgeons have noted that grommet insertion may abolish attacks by
causing changes in pressure in the middle ear, and ultimately in the
inner ear too. I ask Kelly if she thinks her improvement is down to
anything that the doctors have done -- the tablets, the injections, the
grommet -- or whether it is simply due to the condition moving into a
better phase. She shrugs. 'Unfortunately, I don't think even the doctors
know enough about it. I think it has gone into remission, and some of it
is down to me trying to get on with it. I don't have another choice. My
choice is either stay at home and be anxious about going out, or
worrying about having an attack when I'm going out.' Kelly has clearly
taken a decision about how she wants to lead her life. 'If it happens,
it happens. Sometimes that anxiety of worrying about the MÃ©niÃ¨re's can
actually bring on an attack. That's something I noticed a lot. If I left
my house and I worried about it, it happened.' For the moment, at least,
MÃ©niÃ¨re's has weakened its grip over Kelly, physically and
psychologically, but whether that's through its natural progress or down
to the various medications and procedures remains to be seen. For the
moment, Kelly is simply thankful to have regained some of her life, but
she remains uncertain as to what the future holds. Is the MÃ©niÃ¨re's
disease just quiescent, soon to resurface, or has it been beaten into
submission? As I listen to Mark's and Kelly's stories, they represent
yet another reminder of the vulnerabilities of our senses, and indeed
our lives. A tiny thinning of bone, or a slight overproduction of fluid,
can render us unable to hear, unable to socialise, incapable of walking
in a straight line, impotent in the face of gravity. Tiny defects in our
anatomy, in some cases so miniscule that they have not been noted until
a few years ago, can influence our perception of sounds, of posture, of
up and down, and of movement -- all in life-changing ways. And these
stories are another example of the fundamental role our senses have in
our relationship with the world outside

us, the physical, psychological and social environment we inhabit --
even those senses that we do not recognise as such, that we are not even
aware of. Once again, they form an aspect of our life that we notice
only through its absence. OceanofPDF.com

8 THE BURNING TRACKS OF MY TEARS

'It is strange that the tactile sense, which is so infinitely less
precious to men than sight, becomes at critical moments our main, if not
only, handle to reality.' Vladimir Nabokov, Lolita 'I sometimes wonder
if the hand is not more sensitive to the beauties of sculpture than the
eye. I should think the wonderful rhythmical flow of lines and curves
could be more subtly felt than seen. Be this as it may, I know I can
feel the heartthrobs of the ancient Greeks in their marble gods and
goddesses.' Helen Keller, The Story of My Life

After inhabiting the same clinic room in my hospital's neurology
department for over a decade, I am still unable to master the
temperature control. In the height of summer, the air conditioning keeps
me comfortable, although there is a faint whiff of sewage, or perhaps a
dead rat, emanating from the grates in the ceiling. In winter, however,
the temperamental heating means the room is decidedly frosty. There is
usually a race to find one of the few plug-in radiators in the
department, but if my colleagues are ahead of me and grab them first, I
will shiver my way through my morning clinic. I rarely miss the days
when we all wore white coats, but at times like this I would be grateful
for an extra layer to hold the cold at bay. It is on one such a winter's
day that I meet Miriam (not her real name). London is in the midst of a
very cold spell, and occasional flakes of snow fly past the window,
interrupting my view of the Shard. I can see a tide of people pouring
out of the Tube station, zipping their coats under their chins and
turning up their collars as they face the icy wind. But as I call Miriam

in to the clinic room, I am struck by her odd attire. In her late
forties, with short dark hair, she is wearing a thick down jacket and
holds her gloves and scarf in one hand, but as I look down to her feet I
note, to my surprise, that she is wearing sandals. Between the straps,
the skin of her feet glows bright red, in stark contrast to my white
fingers, slowly defrosting from my journey into work. Her teenage son
silently accompanies her, with footwear more appropriate for the weather
outside. Once they are both settled, we begin to explore her problems.
'My feet have burned for as long as I can remember,' she tells me. 'Even
as a child, I would hate wearing shoes. No matter what temperature it
was outside, they would always feel hot.' She describes periods lasting
hours or days when her feet would feel incandescent, as if thrust into a
fire, often triggered by exercise, but also just by sitting; sometimes
even without a clear cause. But over the years, this burning has become
much worse, to the point that it is positively agonising. Now, even when
her feet should be icy cold, the burning continues. Even in the chilly
clinic room, she shifts her feet uncomfortably and occasionally winces
as she talks. 'The rest of me feels cold but my feet are just on fire.
They feel like they are in a furnace.' Sleeping is an issue: 'I
constantly seek out cold spots in the bed and cannot bear to have the
duvet over my feet. It is exhausting. As soon as I start to feel sleepy,
the burning means I have to move them to find the next cold part of the
bed.' She has begun to put her socks in the freezer, wearing them as she
gets into bed, or using icepacks to obtain relief. 'I have noticed
lately that I am actually getting frostbite,' she says. The treatment
for her discomfort is damaging her toes. When I examine her, I look
carefully at the skin of her feet. Apart from the puce hue, slowly
fading to normal somewhere just above her ankles, they look rather
unremarkable. This sort of burning sensation is something I see most
frequently in people with severe diabetes, where the persistently high
levels of glucose damage the blood vessels that supply the nerve fibres,
the conduits for sensory impulses from the skin to the central nervous
system. Starved of an adequate blood supply, the health of the nerve
fibres themselves then suffer. But with diabetes, I would expect to see
some other evidence of nerve damage -- some numbness, perhaps some
weakness, or at least a change in reflexes -- yet with Miriam there
really is nothing.

The devastation from the loss of touch-sensation is readily apparent.
Take Paul's loss of pain through a genetic mutation rendering him
destined to damage himself beyond repair; the absence of proprioception
leaving Rahel immobile and infirm. But the opposite can be equally
destructive. Too much sensation -- the perception of it in its absence,
or the amplification of it -- can also have life-changing consequences.
Think about the unpleasantness of waking up having slept on your arm,
the painful tingling as the circulation is restored; or when you have
been sitting cross-legged for a little too long -- you go to stand up,
and the pins and needles, and numbness of your foot, cause you to almost
stumble with discomfort and the inability to feel your foot on the
floor. Now multiply these feelings a hundred- or a thousand-fold;
imagine that these sensations, now infinitely more intense, were also no
longer transient but permeated every aspect of your waking life. As with
loss of sensation, sometimes the cause is damage to our nervous system,
occasionally to a function of our genes. And as with Paul and Rahel, the
effects are surprising, shocking and transformative, but also tell us
much about how we all make sense of our skin and what it tells us of the
world within and beyond us. As well as being a barrier between us and
the outside world, the skin is also a bridge between exterior and
interior, a conduit for moisture, temperature and chemicals -- but
clearly also sensation. An array of sensory organs are embedded in the
tips of our fingers and the ends of our toes, indeed throughout our skin
-- organs to detect pressure, delicate changes in texture, skin
movement; others to detect light-touch or the sense of vibration. Some
are specialised to detect the bending of a hair in its follicle. These
tiny organs, like pressure pads on the floor of a bank vault, sit on the
endings of nerve fibres, with each individual fibre carrying only one
specific type of receptor, so that one fibre may only detect skin
movement, another only texture. But this subdivision of labour does not
stop here. Fibres of different size or shape each conduct different
sensation types, like telephone cables each carrying a different
conversation. The smallest fibres are those largely responsible for pain
and temperature, and seem particularly prone to damage by diabetes and
other specific diseases. Unlike other sensation types, there are few
specific organs in the skin dedicated to

detecting pain. Instead, the endings of these nerve fibres float free,
and are themselves the detectors of pain. But how do these nerve endings
actually detect the presence of something that might cause the body
harm? Over recent decades, numerous different molecular receptors have
been identified on the tips of these nerve fibres, each detecting
different triggers, such as heat, cold, inflammation or acid. In the
presence of these triggers, the nerve endings generate signals that are
propagated up the nerve fibres, the very first step from periphery to
brain, the origin of sensory perception. Even at this molecular level,
perception and reality diverge. In the past few years, specific
receptors have been identified that detect not just temperature, but
very specific temperatures. For example, one specific detector will be
triggered only by temperatures above 42Â°C; another at less than 17Â°C.
But it seems that hot and cold are not the only triggers for these
receptors. Through the power of evolution, Nature has worked out how to
trick us. Plants have developed substances that can also make us
perceive hot or cold, be it to attract us or repel us from touching or
eating them. Remember your last outing to a Thai or Vietnamese
restaurant, that gentle warmth in the mouth as you eat your meal. As you
bite down on a wayward sliver of chilli, that warmth is replaced by a
jolt of burning as your mouth is flooded by a compound called capsaicin,
released from the chilli. It turns out that capsaicin is a natural
trigger of one of these receptors, tricking the nervous system into
experiencing a sensation of damaging heat. Similarly, the 'minty cool'
that is a favoured slogan of advertisements for chewing gum or
toothpaste has its basis in this trick of Nature. Menthol or eucalyptol,
chemicals in mint and eucalyptus respectively, activate receptors that
detect a drop in temperature, giving us that feeling of coolness in the
mouth or the skin. And we now know that other plants, too, like garlic,
cinnamon and horseradish, contain substances that seek to confuse us, to
convince us that we are harming ourselves when we eat them. But Nature's
trickery has backfired. We have learned that these substances do not
harm us, and now actively seek out these plants for their sensations and
tastes, demonstrating the fine line between pain and pleasure. The
original aim, to stop us eating these plants, has actively led us to
seek them out. But perhaps this explains why children tend to avoid
these foodstuffs. They have not yet learned to appreciate the joy of
garlic-laden pasta or a spicy pad thai.

If you damage your small nerve fibres, your ability to detect the pain
of a pinprick may be either altered or lessened, and although you may
experience pain, your ability to detect temperature would also be
impaired. Conditions like leprosy cause the destruction of nerves that
result in an inability to feel pain or temperature in the extremities of
the body. Diabetes may cause numbness, but it may also cause irritation
of these nerves, resulting in debilitating persistent pain. For Miriam,
though, this is not the case. Her nerves are entirely intact. On a
hunch, I ask her if anyone else in the family has a similar condition.
She laughs, as does her son, who has remained absolutely silent until
now. To my surprise, he begins to remove his white trainers and sport
socks. 'My father has it, and so does my son,' Miriam says, as he peels
back his socks to reveal feet the same violaceous colour as hers. 'I
always thought it was just one of those things. I have had it almost all
my life, and saw it in my father when I was growing up.' It is only the
worsening agony of burning that has led her to seek medical help;
otherwise she would have simply continued to live with it. Her son is
also rather nonchalant about his feet, as he has never known any
different. I ask him if he has the same burning. 'Yes, a little, but it
does not bother me too much, especially on cold days like this. In the
summer, though, I can't wear shoes.' As her son exposes his feet too, I
feel a slight tingle of excitement that I may have made a diagnosis -- a
condition once read about but never seen. In medicine, there is an old
adage of 'When you hear hoof beats, think of horses, not zebras,'
ascribed to Dr Theodore Woodward, a Maryland professor of medicine in
the 1940s, his point being that one should look for the most likely
explanation for a set of symptoms and signs, not look to a rare and
exotic diagnosis. As neurologists, we pride ourselves on an
encyclopaedic knowledge of strange and rare conditions (nowadays
assisted by the internet), a throwback to the days when we had little to
offer except a diagnosis itself. Thankfully those days are long gone,
and we have an arsenal of treatments to offer, but this spirit of
seeking out the rare, those cases that have gone undiagnosed before,
continues to be woven through the fabric of our speciality. We like to
consider ourselves as hunters of the zebras (or even better, unicorns),
seeking out the rare beast among the vast

herd of horses. And as I gaze at the two pairs of glowing feet in front
of me, belonging to Miriam and her son, I think I recognise one of those
zebras. 'I'm probably not like your normal hotel guests, who eats a
varied diet. I ate the same sort of thing every evening for dinner,
which was just a locally caught coral trout. Beautiful meal: organic,
fresh. And I would eat that every night for probably the ten to fourteen
days that we were visiting. It was delicious.' I speak to Alison down
the line, she in her hometown of Sydney, me in London. She is telling me
about her family's favourite destination for rest and relaxation, a
resort in Fiji so beautiful and tranquil that they would travel to the
same hotel year after year. It sounds idyllic; I have visions of palm
trees swaying in the breeze, white-sand beaches and crystal-clear
turquoise sea, and am overcome by a pang of envy as I look out of the
window at the steel-grey London sky. As she describes her fantastic
meals, I gaze at my lunch of a cheese sandwich, feeling shortchanged. I
have never met her face to face, but googling her brings up a picture of
a slim, polished blond woman, perhaps in her late forties, and in my
mind's eye I see her, her husband and their three children in that
fivestar resort, away from the stresses and strains of normal life back
home. However, in 2013, several days into one of their regular trips,
Alison experienced something odd; something felt not quite right with
her feet. 'I was washing my hands, and I had a strange sensation: when I
walked across the tiles, it felt like my feet might be a little bit
sensitive. But it came and went, and it was fairly mild, so I didn't
really think about it too much.' On her return to Sydney, she mentioned
it to her doctor, but as these strange sensations had disappeared, they
were dismissed. It was not until the following year, back in Fiji, that
she noticed something again. But this time is was not just her feet.
'When I was washing my hands, it felt like hot was cold and cold was
hot. And after about twenty-four to forty-eight hours, I was eventually
finding it hard to even hold a glass of cold water. It felt like my
fingers were burning around the glass.' Her sensation of temperature in
her hands had been switched around, inverted to the point that what
should have felt like refreshing icycold water felt scalding hot, and
the warm water of the shower felt

shockingly cold. The rules of the world as we know them had turned on
their head. But the reversed sensation was not just in her hands. 'If I
put the water to my lips, it felt like my lips were burning.' As she
walked across the cool tiles of the bathroom floor, the soles of her
feet burned. 'If I tried to step into the pool, it felt like my feet
were burning in the water. And then the pain was so bad that it would
make me cry. And the tears felt like they were burning my face because
it was that sensitive. It was very frightening. I didn't know where it
was going to end.' I ask her if there was anything to see -- a rash, a
redness or any external manifestation of illness or dysfunction. Alison
says, 'I mean, the family photos are fantastic. I looked the epitome of
health. I had a tan, I was well, no fever, no vomiting, no diarrhoea.
But I'm actually really in pain the whole time.' With Alison in a world
of pain and confusion, her grip of physical reality waning, she and her
family were terrified. They called on some medical connections they had
and after a little while managed to speak to an experienced doctor, who
suggested a possible explanation. The answer is a surprising one, and
explains both Alison's burning tears and Miriam's glowing toes. In fact,
it is an entity that you will already be familiar with: the sodium
channel -- and specifically, just like the cause of Paul's congenital
insensitivity to pain, the Nav 1.7 sodium channel. In some respects,
Paul is the very mirror image of Alison and Miriam: on the one side, a
total absence of pain even with intense provocation, on the other,
intense pain without a cause. For Alison, the diagnosis is in her
nightly fish supper. Everyone is familiar with the dangers of seafood on
holiday -- a strange-tasting fish stew, some dodgy mussels, and the
resultant upset stomach. But to have such symptoms as Alison's, with a
reversal of temperature-sensation as a result of food poisoning, seems
bizarre. However, it is not the fish itself that is causing the
poisoning; it is what the fish has been eating. The poison comes from
lower down the food chain. Ciguatera poisoning is almost unheard of in
the UK, but will be more familiar to neurologists working in the
Caribbean or around the Pacific, and globally it is thought to be the
commonest form of fish poisoning, with up to 50,000 cases worldwide
every year. The toxin, ciguatoxin, is the product of a plankton that is
found on coral reefs and ingested by certain fish, which

are then eaten by other, larger fish, the toxin then gradually
concentrating in their tissues, especially the head, roe and skin. The
bigger the fish and the higher up the food chain, the more ciguatoxin it
is likely to contain. Unlike many types of food poisoning, ciguatoxin is
not destroyed by cooking or freezing, and it is not caused by the
mishandling of food. Odourless and undetectable, the toxin does its work
when we eat contaminated fish. Once ingested, it is rapidly distributed
throughout our bloodstream and around our bodies, binding to targets in
our gut, heart, brain and nerves. Disruption of normal function in these
organs ensues, sometimes resulting in diarrhoea, vomiting and abdominal
pain, changes in heart rate and blood pressure, and difficulties with
concentration and memory. But it is the damage caused to the peripheral
nerves that causes ciguatera poisoning's most striking symptom, that of
'hot--cold reversal'. While the precise mechanism by which this happens
remains obscure, an increasingly familiar culprit is to blame.
Ciguatoxin binds to the ubiquitous Nav 1.7 sodium channels, causing
their dysfunction and, consequently, abnormalities in the operation of
the small nerve fibres acting as the conduit for pain and temperature
information. Confusion in these pathways causes bewilderment of our
nervous systems and the cold tiled floor of the hotel room is perceived
as the burning embers of a fire walk. But while the nervous system tells
a lie, reality remains constant -- a block of ice held against the skin
may feel burning hot, but will still cause frostbite. In truth, I have
always been fascinated by ciguatera toxicity, since the very first time
I read about it. In neurology, we are used to people experiencing things
that aren't there or not perceiving things that are there. But this is
different: a single molecule, derived from plankton, scrambling our
senses to such a degree that the rules of physics appear to be upended;
that hot is cold and cold is hot, like Satan whispering in your ear,
making you believe the opposite of what is true. It is perhaps one of
the best examples of how, when it comes to your understanding of the
world around you, you can be deceived or betrayed by your own body, your
own nervous system. Alison was the only member of her family to be
poisoned like this, however, and no one else in the hotel was afflicted.
The answer may lie in her lack of dietary variety: the same dish,
specifically coral trout, night after night after night -- 'delicious,
organic, freshly caught' but laden with

ciguatoxin, the poison trickling into her with every meal, building up
with each idyllic day in the sun. On hearing a possible explanation of
her symptoms, Alison returned to Sydney, where a diagnosis of ciguatoxin
poisoning was confirmed. She was put on medication that eased the
discomfort, but the painful temperature inversion persisted for three to
six months. She continued to have flare-ups for a couple of years
afterwards, triggered by periods of illness or stress. Even now, some
six years later, Alison still lives in the shadow of the coral trout,
occasionally experiencing symptoms when sufficiently stressed. She tells
me, 'Especially in the first stages of recovery, I took no medications,
no caffeine, that would stimulate it; if I drank caffeine, I'd have
burning around my mouth. I've also avoided alcohol for the past six
years. I've tried it on and off, and found that it made me feel quite
strange again.' I ask Alison if she would ever eat fish again.
Unsurprisingly, she says, 'For me, the experience was so severe that
it's taken a lot of years to recover. I think that I will probably never
eat seafood again.' Before anyone who does not live or holiday in these
exotic locations sits too comfortably, they should heed a word of
warning from Matthew Kiernan, Alison's neurologist in Sydney, who
believes ciguatoxin may be affecting people without them being aware of
what is causing their symptoms. Fish that are caught in the Caribbean
can easily be on a restaurant table in London that evening. Similarly,
fish throughout Asia--Pacific are distributed through very efficient
networks. I think that there's a lot of exposure going on, but probably
not so much realisation. So every time someone gets what would be called
food poisoning after going and eating fish at a restaurant, there's no
understanding that it might be ciguatera related to reef fish. And when
you order reef fish in a restaurant in London, you don't ask, 'How big
was the fish? Where was it caught?' So if a restaurant offers coral
trout, it seems pretty exotic and a lot of people would go for it.
Miriam and her son, however, have never been to Fiji, and the answer for
them is less exotic. As the family history would suggest, the cause of
their problems is not poisoning, or indeed any other external factor. It
is in their

genes. And when I say they are the mirror image of Paul, this is almost
literally the case. For while Paul has mutations in the SCN9A gene that
abolish production of the Nav 1.7 sodium channel, the molecular
apparatus responsible for conduction of pain, Miriam has the opposite.
Her family has a mutation in SCN9A that results in overactivity of this
sodium channel. She and her son have a condition called primary
erythromelalgia, or PE. Since the original description of a mutation in
this gene, in 2004, more than twenty different mutations at different
points in the gene have been identified in families with PE. But they
all have similar consequences. Each mutation results in subtle changes
to the structure and function of the sodium channel, altering its
properties, how easily it opens and how long for. And even such minor
changes as this result in the nerve-fibre endings being triggered under
normal conditions, rather than in response to scalding water or a raging
fire, creating the illusion of painful burning when there is none. But
these types of sodium channels exist not only in those painsensory
fibres. They are also present, in large concentrations, in other nerve
fibres weaving through the skin -- so-called 'sympathetic' fibres, part
of the nervous system that is largely hidden from our own awareness,
regulating bodily functions like heart function, blood pressure and
movement of the gut. This network of nerves also regulates the
constriction and dilation of blood vessels, and its dysfunction in PE
causes small capillaries in the skin to engorge -- thus the puce colour
of Miriam's feet. With the diagnosis confirmed, Miriam is keen for
treatment. She is seeking a resolution to her torment. Like most genetic
conditions, however, there is unfortunately no cure. The cause of the
symptoms is intrinsic to her DNA, part of her own make-up. And the bad
news for her is that most cases of PE are very problematic to treat.
Local anaesthetics like lidocaine act primarily on the sodium channel,
and so it would make sense to try these drugs, and skin patches
impregnated with local anaesthetic are often used to treat pain of nerve
origin. But unfortunately for people with PE, the very same changes in
structure and function in the sodium channel also cause changes in the
site to which the local anaesthetic binds, rendering it ineffective in
roughly half of all patients. And indeed, Miriam and her son appear to
be in that unlucky half: the lidocaine patches do not work. So we try
another drug, one more usually used for epilepsy and that also targets
the sodium channels. And while this does not resolve her pain, it at
least

dulls it. The sensation of hot embers is replaced with a prickling heat,
more tolerable, less overriding. 'I can sleep a little easier now,' she
tells me when I see her next, 'and the attacks are less severe. It
hasn't transformed my life, but it has made things a little better.' But
the last time I see her, she is still wearing her sandals. You might be
forgiven for thinking that everything boils down to the sodium channel.
While the mechanical principle -- the opening and closing of molecular
pores to allow electrical charge to move in and out of cells -- is at
the very heart of almost all biology, it does not explain everything.
You will remember Dawn, whose eyesight has been slowly taken away from
her by benign tumours strangling her optic nerves; over the past couple
of years, her arrival in the waiting room has become announced by her
white stick tapping on the floor. But, despite the devastating blow of
losing her vision, I am amazed by her cheerfulness, her breezy manner,
whenever I see her, and by her husband's apparent stoicism in the face
of family life becoming increasingly difficult. I can only imagine
seeing your wife, fit and able only a few years before, gradually
declining in ability and health. Whenever I ask how it is all going, I
am greeted by a smile and a 'Not too bad!' as she folds her cane and
takes a seat. Dawn has been an army wife since her teens. I suspect it
is this resilience that has seen her and her husband Martin through some
very dark times. But today is different. As I call her in to the clinic
room, the smile is gone, a grim look on her face. She looks ashen, her
hair unkempt, and Martin follows, no longer with his usual relaxed
demeanour. Without any of the usual small talk, and even before she has
found the seat with her hand, she begins. 'I'm in agony! This is
absolutely awful. I can't eat, can't drink, can't wash my hair. For the
last few weeks, the pain in my face has been excruciating!' She
continues, telling me of a pain -- sometimes like a burning needle,
sometimes electric in nature -- in her left cheek and left upper jaw; a
stabbing so intense she cannot tolerate it. If she is holding something,
it drops to the floor with her shock at the severity of the pain. It is
only momentary, a few seconds at a time, but recurs hundreds of times a
day, making life impossible. 'The pain comes on whatever I'm doing, but
certain things trigger it off -- brushing my teeth, drinking or eating,

sometimes even the wind or water on my face.' Hence the unkempt hair --
she has been too afraid of worsening the pain by washing it. On one
occasion, she was woken up by it, screaming with agony in the middle of
the night. Martin initially thought she was having a nightmare. 'It is
horrible, far worse than anything I have ever experienced. Like the most
painful bit of childbirth.' But unlike labour, this has gone on for
months, not hours. And as she comes to the end of her description, her
last statement is worrying. 'I just can't go on like this!' She has
barely ever complained about her vision, so this puts the intensity of
her pain into context. Pain and sensory symptoms do not result only from
changes in the nerve endings, the receptors that detect sensation, or in
the channels responsible for the electrical signal. Compression or
irritation of the nerves themselves can give rise to a variety of
sensations. The pain of sciatica, for example, will be familiar to many
-- a searing electric pain radiating from the lower back into the
buttock, down the back of the leg and into the heel or foot. Worsened by
walking or standing, it is excruciating and a common cause of
disability. In sciatica, it is the nerve root -- at the place where the
nerves enter the spinal column to join the spinal cord -- that is
compressed. Between the vertebrae, the blocks of bone that form the
spinal column, sit the intervertebral discs, cushions of soft tissue
that allow the vertebrae to move relative to each other and that act as
shock absorbers, preventing the vertebrae from grinding against each
other. But occasionally, these intervertebral discs will protrude a
little, having been pushed out of place, or may even rupture. And when
this happens, the protruding disc may compress the nerve root,
precipitating the pain of sciatica. Certain positions may exacerbate it
and, if you are really unlucky, even coughing, sneezing or straining may
cause a transient worsening of this bulging, resulting in severe
exacerbations of pain. But for Dawn, the cause of her pain is not a
disc. A quick look at her MRI scan provides an explanation -- for deep
within the recesses of her brainstem sits another meningioma tumour,
right next to the trigeminal nerve, the nerve that supplies facial
sensation. The tumour has been there a while, not causing any problems.
But as it has grown it has displaced and stretched the trigeminal nerve,
triggering the severe facial pain she is experiencing, known as
trigeminal neuralgia. The irritated nerve is firing spontaneously,
without any injury or pathology in the face itself. And

because of disruption of the nerve, there is 'cross-talk' within it,
like the conversations in a crossed telephone call. Sensory stimuli like
the wind on her face or her toothbrush gently touching her gums trigger
the pain pathways, causing pain from sensations that should not be in
any way unpleasant -- even breathing. And the pain really is
other-worldly -- so overwhelming, so all-consuming, that I have on
occasion heard people say, 'I can't think about anything else. There are
times when suicide seems like a good option.' I have seen sufferers
dehydrated and malnourished, such is the fear of triggering the pain by
drinking or eating. For many people, trigeminal neuralgia has no obvious
underlying cause. It is sometimes caused by a blood vessel, lying
slightly outside of its normal location, making contact with the
trigeminal nerve. In severe cases, this blood vessel can be dealt with
surgically. But the location and depth of Dawn's tumour, as with the one
compressing her optic nerves, means that surgery is not an easy option.
The knife would be potentially catastrophic and life-threatening. The
neurosurgeon also looking after her agrees. We are left with the option
of trying drugs to suppress these pain-generating impulses, and we start
her on a cocktail of medications to alter the activity of the ion
channels transmitting these signals. Over the next few months, while the
dosages constantly increase, her trigeminal pain continues unabated,
although occasionally she has brief windows of relief. I begin to dread
her visits, feeling powerless to help, as the agonizing zaps continue.
'The vision, my other problems, are not a major issue at the moment.
This pain -- it colours everything,' she says. I send her to a
specialist clinic, for alternative strategies, and she undergoes a
number of procedures, with minimal results. It becomes increasingly
untenable to leave Dawn like this. Everything we have tried does little
to ease her pain, now the dominant feature of her life. After lots of
discussion, among the doctors involved and with Dawn, surgery is
proposed: a removal of part of the tumour, an attempt to decompress the
nerve. She understands the risks, and the possibility that this, too,
might fail. Speaking of the surgery, afterwards, Dawn says, 'I didn't
really have a choice. I had to try and relieve that pain. The decision
was in desperation.' After regaining consciousness, Dawn is confused for
about three days. As her faculties return, she realises that she is
pain-free. But she has not

emerged from surgery unscathed. The left side of her face is numb, the
searing agony replaced by nothingness, an inability to feel anything.
And, when she talks, she slurs her words. When I see her shortly after
the operation, she sounds half-cut, several gin and tonics down the
hatch. She is clearly relieved to be free of the pain, but anxious about
the complications of the surgery. With time, however, her speech
improves, and nine months after surgery, listening to her, she sounds
like she always did. The numbness has remained, however. 'Hopefully, the
numbness will improve, but the horrific pain isn't there. It drags you
down. It was definitely worth taking that step and having the surgery.'
A price worth paying. As I have shown you on many occasions, disruption
of our senses can occur through damage or dysfunction at any point along
the pathway from sensory organ to brain. The sense of touch is no
exception, but neither the loss of touch, nor an excess or amplification
of touch-sensation, are always due to such damage or dysfunction.
Through our nerves, the streams of information from our skin continue on
their journey through our spinal cords and to our brains, but,
occasionally, certain surprising sensory symptoms can result from
problems within the central nervous system. As Abdul (not his real name)
enters the room, his anxiety is etched on his face. The space around him
vibrates with his heightened worry, though physically he looks fine. He
is young, in his mid-twenties, dressed in a tracksuit and of Middle
Eastern heritage, and is trailed by his equally anxious mother. I invite
them to sit down and ask Abdul what is wrong. Within thirty seconds my
heart sinks, as he unleashes a torrent of words before he has even taken
his seat. The act of coming through the door, being in front of a
doctor, has caused the dam to crumble. I catch 'Google' -- my heart
sinks further as I contemplate every doctor's nemesis in this situation
-- as well as 'water' and 'legs', and tears well up as he continues to
talk. After a couple of minutes, I have no option but to interrupt him
and ask him to slow down and to start at the beginning. He pauses for
breath, wipes the tears from his eyes and begins to tell me his story.
He first noticed a strange sensation in his left leg a few weeks ago,
like water running down the inside of his calf. But over the past few
days, this sensation has spread, involving his right foot and
occasionally his thighs,

too. And this feeling of liquid has intensified to such an extent that
sometimes he pats himself down, convinced that he might have lost
continence, urine trickling down his legs. We talk through his symptoms
and I ask him about other issues, like bladder and bowel function,
vision, the arms and face, all of which are normal. Then he continues,
'And I looked up my symptoms on Google, and it came up with multiple
sclerosis!' The tears recommence, and I see his mother's eyes glisten in
synchrony. When we finally get through his medical history, with
multiple interruptions, I examine him to find all is normal. But despite
this, I fear that, on this occasion, Dr Google may be correct. As we
have seen with Irene and her loss of taste, the inflammation seen in MS
usually causes a loss of function -- in the form of numbness, weakness,
loss of vision, and so on. But the loss of myelin, the insulating
protein that wraps itself around nerve fibres, as happens in
inflammation, may result not just in a loss of function; it can also
produce 'positive', function-gaining symptoms. Imagine a tangle of
electrical wires, all isolated from one another by their rubber
insulating sheaths. If the wires' outer coatings become frayed or
stripped away, the wires short-circuit, sparking furiously as electrical
current jumps from one wire to another. An impulse that should lead from
one place to another instead ends up in an unintended destination,
resulting in confusion. And this is precisely what can happen in MS.
Sometimes these impulses are triggered by a mechanical stretch of the
nervous system. Patients with inflammation in the spinal cord in the
neck will sometimes complain of tingling down their back and to their
legs when they bend their neck forward, triggering an already irritated
area -- a symptom called Lhermitte's phenomenon. But other additional
sensory phenomena can also arise: a gentle pinprick to the thigh
resulting in tingling throughout the leg; the stroking of the back of
the hand with a cotton-wool ball producing a strange sensation in the
cheek, as if the delicate filaments of a spider's web have settled on
the face. This cross-talk of highly organised circuits and pathways
confusing the nervous system generates sensations from nothing, or
causes misinterpretation, essentially illusions or hallucinations of
touch. Abdul's symptoms are certainly very consistent with MS. He
describes a progression of symptoms over a number of weeks. He is young,
and although his genetic origin is the Middle East, where MS is less
common,

he was born and bred in London; a curious feature of this condition is
that the risk of developing MS is connected with geographic latitude in
younger life -- the further from the equator you are brought up, the
higher your risk of having it. There are many theories as to why this
might be the case -- genetic variation, levels of vitamin D, possible
infectious agents -- but none are proven. In any case, Abdul's symptoms,
affecting both legs, would certainly be consistent with a problem in the
spinal cord. With more than a touch of guilt, I play down Abdul's
concerns for fear of escalating another onslaught of anxiety. I know
that if I explore this now, our consultation will come to an abrupt end,
at least from the perspective of achieving anything useful. I tell him
that it seems likely he has a patch of inflammation in his spinal cord,
but the cause of it is unclear. Occasionally inflammation may be
triggered by an autoimmune attack in response to a viral infection, in
which case it is unlikely to recur. I feel duty-bound to confirm that MS
is in the mix as an explanation, but stress to him that the common view
of MS being a life-threatening or devastating condition needs to be
corrected. Within a few days, he has an MRI scan. On the images I can
see a large abnormality within the bottom end of his thoracic cord --
the part of the spinal cord at the chest level -- and further areas of
damage in his brain. It all looks very much like MS, but what the scans
do not show is that these patches of inflammation are of different ages.
But before I can even tell Abdul the results, before the scan has even
been reviewed by my neuroradiology colleague, my secretary receives a
phone call from him, in tears, his terror at the possible diagnosis
overwhelming him, and my efforts at trying to reassure him are a
miserable failure. Once I have the results to hand I call him back to
talk him through them, and once again I tell him that, while it could be
MS, we need to see if the inflammation is recurrent or a one-off. I
organise a repeat scan in three months' time, to see if there are any
changes. But within a few days, Abdul is back on the phone, asking about
a lumbar puncture. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid, the liquor
bathing the brain and spinal cord -- removed through the insertion of a
long needle into the lower back -- can help confirm the diagnosis of MS,
but these days it is more typically done when the diagnosis is in doubt.
The inflammation settles down and his symptoms resolve. He is left with
some minor tingling in his thighs, an echo of the inflammation in his
spinal

cord that has damaged the tracts of nerve fibres from his legs to his
brain. His fate is going to be decided in the MS clinic, where a
decision will be made about whether to start him on medication to
prevent further relapses. The reality is that all of this -- the sodium
channels, the nerve fibres, the columns of fibres ascending in the
spinal cord -- forms a prelude to the main event. As we have seen
throughout the preceding chapters, the perception of our senses -- the
awareness of sensory inputs -- happens in the brain, not in the nerves
or the spinal cord. Many organisms, even single-celled creatures like
amoebae, can sense the outside environment, moving away from noxious
stimuli or towards food sources. So, in a way, they feel too; they
respond to sensation, to the sampling of the chemical or mechanical
world around them. But this reflex-response to the environment is a
world away from conscious sensation. When we feel touch sensation, it is
so much more than a reflex. We ascribe meaning to these sensations,
interpreting what our skin tells us in the context of the internal world
and the wider, external one. When we hold a 50p piece in our hand, we
recognise it as a coin, and understand its utility. When we pet a dog,
the sensation of its soft fur and warmth is not only consistent with
what we expect a dog to be, but is also associated with an emotional
quality, a sense of comfort and contentment. And when we catch our thumb
with a hammer, this does not simply result in a rapid withdrawal of our
hand; the pain has an emotional aspect to it too. As we have seen, pain
itself is not represented in one single brain area. There are multiple
areas, each involved in subtly different aspects of the experience of
pain -- the location of it, the emotional component to it, even the
physical changes such as increased heart rate, blood pressure and
breathing rate, preparing us to run away or take other forms of action
in the context of pain. Our perception of our senses is crucially
influenced by our attention. The brain is unable to process and make
sense of absolutely everything in the world around us, so multiple
processes act as a searchlight in the darkness, illuminating a small
area of our sensory world, intensifying the detail. We are all familiar
with not hearing something in our auditory environment until our
attention is drawn to it, when all of a sudden it becomes rather

obvious; or with the sound of a dripping tap, suddenly impossible to
ignore once you have noticed it. But attention is also an important
factor in the perception of touch sensation. Sit still and quietly, and
think about your feet. Pay attention to the feel of the socks on your
toes, the pressure of the shoe-leather across the top of your feet, the
feel of the floor on the soles. Sensations previously imperceptible come
to the fore, like the blurry background of a visual scene suddenly
brought into focus. And this shifting of the attention spotlight is also
at play when it comes to pain. Focusing on a painful stimulus
exacerbates the perception of pain intensity, but being distracted by
other mental tasks decreases activity in the areas of the brain
responsible for localising pain. Treatments like mindfulness-based
therapy aim to either distract you from your pain, or to help you
understand the pain in the absence of its emotional component. And as
with all our other sensations, we are constantly analysing what we are
feeling and comparing them to our expectations or previous experiences
of the outside world. This concept of our internal model of the world,
of drawing conclusions from our senses, is based on our predictions of
the world around us. For all of us, there is sometimes a disconnect
between reality and perception of sensation. Illusions are the most
obvious example, and they exist in the touch sphere, not only in the
visual or auditory. One famous phenomenon is that of the 'cutaneous
rabbit'. Ask someone else to close their eyes; now tap them six times on
their forearm -- three times at the wrist, followed by a pause of two
seconds, then three times at the elbow. They will likely feel successive
taps moving up their arm, like a hopping rabbit -- a potent example of
touch information being interpreted in the context of expectation. As if
she has not had enough to deal with, Dawn has yet more symptoms as a
result of her meningioma tumours. In fact, looking back at her medical
records, I am reminded that the reason that I first met her, over a
decade ago, was for something entirely different that she has suffered
from since long before the trigeminal neuralgia started. Several times a
week, sometimes several times a day, Dawn experiences something unusual.
'It begins with a sudden wave of nausea. Then I get some tingling,
always in

the left shoulder,' she says. 'Within a second or two, the pins and
needles spread to the left arm, the leg, the face, in fact the whole of
the left side of the body. It then stays with me for between ten and
thirty seconds before subsiding.' The tingling in itself is not painful,
but, she continues, 'It is really distracting. I feel I just have to
stop talking. Afterwards, I feel a little weak and off-balance.' On
discussing these episodes with her, it is unclear whether she simply
cannot talk when they occur or if she is so disturbed by the sensations
spreading through her left side that she cannot maintain focus. Before
the onset of her trigeminal neuralgia, it is these episodes and her
visual loss that she found the most distressing. The visual impairment
is a persistent problem, but these episodes, arising from nowhere,
untriggered and unexpected, always throw her off-kilter, and she lives
in the expectation that they could happen at any moment. The identical
nature of these episodes, and the rate at which they unfold, are
absolutely typical of epileptic seizures -- abnormal electrical activity
spreading across the surface of the brain. Like Susan's visual seizures,
in Chapter 2, they are not generalised convulsions, full-blown seizures
causing unconsciousness, shaking and a risk of biting the tongue. Just
listening to Dawn's description tells us where in the brain her seizures
are occurring. The tingling in the left shoulder, followed by a rapid
spread to the arm, the face, then down to the whole of the left side of
the body, implies that her seizures are affecting the right side of the
brain, in the primary sensory cortex. This area is one of those regions
that identifies the anatomical location of the origin of a painful
stimulus. But it is not just pain that is encoded here; it is the other
sensory modalities too. It is here that sensation, at its most basic
level, is processed. This small strip of cortex runs from deep in the
midline of the brain and wraps round to the outside, in the region of
the ear. Imagine a diagram of your own body traced out along the length
of the motor strip. At one end, extending into the sagittal sulcus --
the midline dividing chasm between the brain's right and left
hemispheres -- are the foot and the leg, and, as we climb out of the
sagittal sulcus, the hip, trunk, and neck. Moving further round and out,
are the shoulder, arm and hand. But the sensory homunculus -- meaning
'little man', referring to the representation of our own body in the
sensory cortex -- is not true to scale, nor is it entirely true to form.
Those areas of our body that are more sensitive, with a higher density
of receptors

and nerve endings, where more detailed perceptions of sensation are more
important, are allotted larger areas of cortex. This means that, in a
homunculus diagram, areas like the hand, face, lips and mouth are hugely
distorted, massively out of proportion to less sensitive areas like the
trunk or thigh. In fact, the latter are represented further along the
sensory cortex, beyond the hand area, reaching towards the temporal
lobe. If you think about your own experience of sensation, this
distortion of how our own bodies are represented makes perfect sense.
Perhaps you have been bitten by a mosquito on your back. You can feel
the itch, and you know that somewhere near your left shoulder blade one
of these cursed creatures has left its mark, which is now irritating you
as you lie in bed attempting to sleep. But if you try to reach round to
find the bite, it takes some doing, beyond the simple contortion of your
arm; it may in fact take quite a while to find the exact location of the
bite. But if you have a splinter in your finger, you will immediately
know precisely which area of the finger it is in. The resolution of
sensory detail varies hugely between your finger and back, due to both
the density of sensory organs in each area and the representation in the
sensory homunculus.

Figure 6. The sensory homunculus. Bodily sensations are processed by the
primary (somato-)sensory cortex, but the body is represented in a
distorted fashion, with more sensitive body parts such as the face and
hands represented by larger areas of cerebral cortex.

From Dawn's description, it seems that her seizures are starting in the
shoulder area of the sensory cortex, rapidly spreading, in one
direction, down into the arm area, and in the other direction, to the
trunk and leg areas. I go to her most recent MRI scan to look for a
meningioma sitting over the right sensory cortex, irritating the
underlying brain tissue. But despite the multitude of tumours gradually
displacing and disrupting the underlying tissues, there is none in this
location. As I pause for thought, it occurs to me that she has actually
told me the answer -- because the tingling that she experiences is not
the first symptom she reports. 'The first sign I have is a sudden wave
of nausea that comes over me. Then I get the tingling in the shoulder.'
When I look again at the scan, there is another meningioma deep in the
right temporal lobe. Seizures arising here often result in nausea, the
electrical activity disrupting the nerve supply to the gut. So, it seems
likely that this is the origin of her seizures, with electrical activity
rapidly spreading to the sensory cortex. The activation of these areas
by disorganised electrical signals results in the strange and unpleasant
sensation of tingling passing over her body, a clear illustration of how
sensation can exist purely in the mind, or, rather, the brain. Over the
years, a combination of drugs has largely controlled Dawn's seizures,
but she is still left with the fading of her last vestiges of sight and
her facial numbness. During the regular appointments with which I touch
base with Dawn, my overwhelming sense is one of failure -- the failure
of modern medicine to deal with this most complex of problems. The
cattleprod-like jolts of pain torturing her day and night, and these
sensory seizures, may have finally yielded to the endless prescriptions
of medications and surgery, but her vision continues to worsen. And yet,
despite this, for the most part Dawn is still smiling, refusing to
relent to her condition. The individuals in this chapter show that an
illusion of touch may have its origin at any point in the sensory
pathway -- at the receptors on nerve endings, the nerve fibres
themselves, the circuitry within the central nervous system conveying
these messages to the brain, or the sensory cortex itself. This concept
is common to all the senses; impairment or confusion of our senses may
not be simply a result of damage to our sensory organs -- our

eyes, our ears, and so on -- but may arise from any point in the entire
machinery of our senses. As with vision and the 'what' and 'where'
pathways, or the link between olfactory centres and regions of the brain
involved in memory and emotion, the sensation of touch needs to be put
into context to have meaning. It needs to be integrated with our
emotions, our sense of our own bodies, our other senses. We may feel a
smooth, cold object in the palm of our hand, a flat disk at one end, and
straight protrusion at the other, but we also know it represents a
device for unlocking a door: a key. To sense a trickle of cold down our
cheek is meaningless without understanding that it has begun to rain.
And the persistent dull pain of toothache has an emotional quality to
it, a sense deep inside us of unpleasantness. To ascribe meaning to all
these experiences requires these sensory experiences to penetrate
through to more widespread parts of the brain, those that process
memory, emotion and the sense of our own body in space. And no region of
the brain is more illustrative of this perceptual experience than the
parietal lobe, immediately adjacent to the sensory cortex. Among its
many functions, the parietal lobe can be considered the seat of
consciousness when it comes to sensation, where higher-order analysis
confers meaning to all these sensory inputs. Damage to the parietal lobe
results in a variety of problems: an inability to know where our own
bodies are in relation to the world around us, difficulty recognising
objects by touch, or even a lack of attention to ourselves or the world
outside. Patients with parietal lobe strokes may exhibit inattention to
touch or vision on one side, eating only one half of the plate of food
in front of them or noticing touch only to one arm and not the other.
And it is not just perception of the space around or within us that can
be affected, but the memory of that perception. One of the most famous
examples of this was a Venetian artist who suffered a stroke that
affected his parietal lobe. He was asked to imagine himself standing on
the south side of St Mark's Square and to paint what he could see in his
mind's eye. He drew a remarkably accurate representation of the view,
but only painted what was on the right side of his 'vision', leaving the
left side blank. When asked to imagine himself to be on the north side
of the square, he once again drew half the visual scene, this time the
other side of the square. The visual memories

were present and correct, but somehow he could not access the scene as a
whole. Perhaps there is no more striking phenomenon to exemplify the
relevance of the parietal lobe to our sense of self than that of the
phantom limb. The experience of abnormal sensations or pain emanating
from an amputated limb has long been recognised. The US Civil War
surgeon Silas Weir Marshall describes in a short story a soldier
anaesthetised with chloroform for the amputation of both legs, which had
been horribly mangled and rendered unsalvageable through battle. In the
words of the soldier, Weir writes: \[I\] was suddenly aware of a sharp
cramp in my left leg. I tried to get at it to rub it with my single arm,
but, finding myself too weak, hailed an attendant. 'Just rub my left
calf,' said I, 'if you please.' 'Calf?' said he. 'You ain't none,
pardner. It's took off.' 'I know better,' said I. 'I have pain in both
legs.' 'Wall, I never!' said he. 'You ain't got nary leg.' As I did not
believe him, he threw off the covers, and, to my horror, showed me that
I had suffered amputation of both thighs, very high up. 'That will do,'
said I, faintly.

The phantom-limb hallucination -- feeling that the missing limb is still
there, weeks, sometimes decades after the loss of a body part -- seems
to affect almost everyone with an amputation to some degree. The
symptoms that people experience vary greatly. For some it takes the form
of pain, perhaps as cramp associated with an uncomfortable position they
might have assumed before the amputation, or the feeling of their
fingernails digging into the palm of the hand. For others, these
sensations can be non-painful, like itching, heat or cold. And in a few,
there remains a sensation of movement, either voluntary or involuntary.
People have reported feeling able to wiggle individual 'fingers', to
reach out to pick up the telephone or even to move the 'arm' in an
effort to ward off blows or break a fall. At its extreme, the
phantom-limb phenomenon can have some unfortunate

consequences. One patient who underwent a leg amputation reported, 'I
got out of bed and fell one time. Even when I had the \[false\] leg on
before and would take it off, I still couldn't remember the amputation
for two weeks after I was out of the hospital. And, I would try to walk
and couldn't. I would just fall. I couldn't fathom I didn't have a leg
there.' The phantom-limb phenomenon is a fantastic illustration of the
fact that the parietal lobe is home to a representation of our bodies, a
body map. Very similar to the sensory homunculus, but a map of the
concept of our bodies where they are in relation to the space around
them and to each other body part, rather than specific touch sensations.
And the various manifestations suggest that this body map receives
inputs from our sensory systems, in the form of pain, touch and
temperature, but also the sensation of proprioception -- interpreted
from signals from our joints, ligaments, tendons and muscles --
indicating the position of our limbs. But there are further inputs, such
as vision. Consider an experiment called the 'rubber hand illusion'.
Imagine you are seated at a desk, your left hand hidden from view under
the table. On the table top sits a rubber hand placed roughly above your
hidden real hand. If the rubber hand is stroked with a feather, you are
likely to actually feel the feather on your own hand, and you will feel
that your hand is actually in the exact position of the rubber hand.
This literally mind-bending illusion illustrates the complex streams of
information that are utilised to define our perception of our own body.
But this body map is vulnerable not only to the loss of an arm or a leg.
I have been seeing Laura (not her real name) in my epilepsy clinic for a
number of years now. A young woman in her mid-twenties, over the past
few years she has been plagued by occasional full-blown convulsions, one
every few months. Even-tempered and low-key, she always downplays her
seizures, and is very matter-of-fact when she describes her life being
punctuated by these dramatic events. For someone who has never had a
seizure, it can be hard to comprehend trying to live your normal life --
to work, socialise, have a family -- in the knowledge that any moment,
without warning, you may lose control. At the flick of a switch, you
lose consciousness, waking confused, perhaps having been incontinent,
your colleagues or family members witnesses to a violent and awful
event. We spend our waking lives trying to establish a degree of power
over what we

eat, what we wear, how we appear before others, and epileptic seizures
instantly destroy this autonomy. For the past year or two, we have been
trying to establish control over Laura's epilepsy, all the while mindful
of the fact that Laura wants to start a family. We need to get her off
the most hazardous drugs during pregnancy. After several months of
adding in new medications and weaning her off others, I see her again in
my clinic. She walks in with a broad smile. 'I have not had any
convulsions for several months,' she tells me. I breathe an internal
sigh of relief. It has taken us a while to get to this point. 'But I am
still having seizures!' she continues. I ask her what she means. 'Well,
I am no longer losing consciousness. Those convulsions where I wake up
on the floor, confused and sore -- they have stopped. But I am still
having the prelude to these events; the warning that I had still
happens, but without the full-blown convulsions.' In my delight at her
announcing herself to be free of her convulsions, I have forgotten the
details of her episodes, and she reminds me. 'So, what now happens is
that, at any time -- at work, at home or out and about -- I suddenly
feel that my tongue swells. It feels far too big for my mouth, as if I
have a cannonball in my mouth. Then, within a few seconds, my head
begins to swell too. I feel like it has grown to about four times its
size. I can literally feel it expanding, like a balloon on the end of a
pump. No matter how many times it has happened, how used to it I am, the
feeling of my brain, my eyes, my nose, growing bigger, it is so odd.'
She has had these feelings before, usually as the herald to her
convulsions, and so these hallucinations of her body shape are tinged
with fear of an impending fit. And because, in the past, they have been
followed by a major convulsion, her memory of this feeling is hazy. But
over the past few months she has become habituated to this distortion of
her body shape in isolation, and the anxiety associated with them has
lessened. She has noted these feelings in more detail. 'It is very hard
to describe, not something that many other people have experienced.
Imagine that your body has no fixed shape, that it can stretch or grow.
I view myself to be a little like a Marvel character, bending and
stretching to wild proportions. In my mind, I know that this is not
real, but it feels so real, as if my head is filling the room around me.
And I tell myself that this cannot be true, this is not really
happening, but it is very difficult to argue with your senses.'

And the cause of Laura's experiences? Her seizures originate in the
parietal lobe, the seat of our own body image, the source of our
representation of ourselves. While the new medications have stopped the
abnormal electrical activity that underlies seizures from spreading to
the whole of the brain, they have not succeeded in dampening down the
small sparks in the depths of her neurological body map. Like
firefighters dampening the vegetation around a burning fire, a forest
inferno has been prevented but glowing embers remain, rekindling a flame
every so often. Over time, we finally put out the flames completely, and
she becomes seizure-free, able to lead a normal life. Laura's case is a
powerful example of how our sense of touch or sensation is not a pure
representation of our external, or indeed internal, world. Our senses
are an amalgam of our environment, of sensory triggers, and our internal
processing. The outside world is meaningless without ascribing values to
those inputs, without translation into our higher consciousness.
Consider a balmy summer's evening in the garden. You sit with your eyes
closed, the evening sun warming your face, the gentle breeze ruffling
the hair on your head, the cooling blades of grass tickling the soles of
your feet. You hold a chilled glass of wine in your hand; a ladybird
lands on your leg. All incur sensory inputs that, when broken down to
their most granular level, simply arise from a rich array of receptors
detecting heat, cold, pressure, hair movement and so on. But your brain
is a remarkable thing. It translates these inputs to allow you a
fundamental understanding of what these electrical impulses actually
mean, conferring a sense of reality to these basic signals. And even
then, the story is not complete. As I imagine myself in that garden,
glass of wine in hand, I can feel an overriding sense of pleasure, of
relaxation, as these sensations inform my emotions, my memories, my
experiences. It reminds me of childhood summers, of being carefree,
without worries. It is a virtual reality, a reconstruction of our
senses, that we feel in the context of what has gone before. Laura and
the others here vividly demonstrate this. Their conditions give us a
clearer understanding of how the human machine detects, processes and
determines the meaning of these sensory experiences; of the complex and
highly organised system that takes raw data and, at every level,
interprets the binary signals of these sensory receptors in our skin,
becoming richer, more nuanced, more complex as this

information percolates into our higher levels of consciousness,
integrating our past -- our previous experience and emotion of these
sensations -- and our future -- our expectations -- with our present. It
is when the system goes wrong, when we experience alterations in our
sensation, that we have the stark realisation that our perception of the
physical world is a mere construct of our neurological systems. Subtle
changes in neurological function, precipitated by disease, damage or
genetic variation, fundamentally alter our world as we see it -- or, in
these cases, feel it. A chemical substance originating from algae,
turning our sense of heat and cold upside down; a minor area of
inflammation in the spinal cord resulting in feelings of water trickling
down the legs; small disturbances of electrical function in the brain
causing huge distortions in our sense of the world or ourselves: all
amount to a recognition that sensation is a creation of the entire
nervous system rather than simply the act of feeling the cold hard world
around us. OceanofPDF.com

9 THE PAIN OF SHEER HAPPINESS

'It was a pink sort of smell -- a smell that seemed to get bigger as you
smelled it and then burst, just like the popping of a bubble.' Alexander
McCall Smith, Explosive Adventures

By now, I hope to have truly convinced you that the way we experience
our world is reliant upon the chemical and physical properties of our
bodies, and more specifically our nervous systems, as much as on the
physical properties of the objects around us. Our senses, the conduits
of the exterior to the interior, are not set in stone. The illusions of
everyday life -- its sights, sounds, feel, and so on -- are small
illustrations of the methods or shortcuts that we take to construct our
reality. And when things go wrong, be they tiny chemical changes
(through poisoned fish, for example), acquired injuries or genetic
changes from birth, these can fundamentally alter our understanding of
our external world. While some of the people you have met in these pages
have been affected by major disease, in others the dysfunction may come
down to something as miniscule a change as a single letter in the
genetic code that constitutes DNA -- a simple typo that nonetheless
defines the absence of a sensation, altering the core of the human
experience. Each of our senses, the classic five senses but also those
less well defined, like proprioception or movement perception, are
highly vulnerable. However, this relationship between the structure and
function of our nervous systems and our comprehension of our environment
runs much deeper than our senses. It is about much more than simply
altering how we smell a rose or how we hear a voice. This relationship
influences our internal world too. It influences the very nature of our
understanding of

what reality is. While this may sound rather far-fetched, there are
people all around us whose experience of reality is very different from
the rest of ours. This is not necessarily due to damage or disease, nor
to some other sort of abnormality -- they are normal individuals, with
normal brains, normal genes. People indistinguishable from everyone
else. Most have probably gone through life unaware of the differences
between their 'reality' and the 'reality' of the majority -- depending
on what 'reality' really is. These people may only comprehend that they
are different from others when directly asked about their experiences.
Very rarely, we may even come across individuals who cross that
'reality' divide due to neurological insult or injury, undergoing a
sudden transition in how they experience the world, joining those
countless others out there who have been that way since birth. When I
meet Sheri, it is down a telephone line. Her voice is hypnotising. It is
mellifluous; a gentle, comforting Canadian accent, the pace of speech
easy, like treacle flowing off a spoon. Sheri is a painter in her late
forties, living and working in glorious Vancouver Island, specialising
in landscapes. She is very successful and has exhibited all over the
world. When I later search for her on the internet, I am able to put a
face to the voice. In her Facebook profile photo, she is perched on a
stool, a dog at her feet, in front of what I presume to be one of her
paintings. Her face is framed by chinlength light hair, a black hat with
a thin brim adorning her head, her eyes gazing directly at the camera.
Her paintings are stunning -- large canvases of the Canadian wilderness,
huge skies, occasionally more abstract accounts of the sky at night. But
when we have our chat, I do not yet have a picture of her, or her art,
in my head -- only the voice, her beautiful voice. At the age of
twenty-nine, life for Sheri was pretty ordinary. She was studying for a
masters in art. Her spare time was filled with water sports and she was
taking some marine training to obtain boating qualifications. 'I was
very busy, but it was just a regular, busy life,' she recalls. On the
day that changed that life, she was practising lifeboat drills in a
pool. She was standing by the side of the pool when she suddenly fell
and crashed into the poolside wall. 'I couldn't feel the right side of
my body. Luckily I was surrounded by first responders and I let the
gentleman beside me know that I was having troubles. He lowered me to
the ground and started going

through a battery of tests. He did my vitals and noticed one of my
pupils was larger than the other. I was conscious the whole time this
was happening. It turns out I was having a stroke.' She talks about it
dispassionately now, but it must have been terrifying. Fortunately Sheri
was in the city of Vancouver and the hospital was a stone's throw away,
just up the hill from the pool. A few investigations confirmed the cause
for her symptoms, and she was quickly admitted to intensive care and put
on blood-thinning medications. She was confined to bed for a week, but
could not have done much anyway, had she been allowed to get up and
about. 'I had double vision, so I couldn't see properly. I couldn't
walk. I was quite confused. I just spent most of the time meditating.'
She was told that she had had a brainstem stroke, which explains the
double vision and the difficulty walking, but not the confusion. Putting
things together, I assume she had clots that also shot up to the rest of
her brain, and that it was not just the brainstem that was involved.
Talking to her now, she sounds entirely normal, and I assume she has
made a full physical recovery. When I ask her how long it took her to
recover, to my surprise she tells me that the process is still ongoing,
some twenty years later. She says that to get back to walking took her
about three months. 'It was a progression,' she tells me. 'Initially, I
pulled myself along the floor and learned how to crawl again. Then
walking, but you could still tell that I didn't walk normally. My mom
helped me take my first steps -- like a child all over again. I guess it
took maybe eight months to get to the point where no one could notice
any difference.' I imagine it must have been a traumatic time. 'It was
very challenging,' Sheri says, with a hefty dose of understatement. 'I
was more worried about my mom, to be honest. For me, at the time, it was
a little bit bewildering. I didn't understand what had happened. I
couldn't conceive of what rehabilitation would be like. I didn't know if
I'd ever walk again. I just didn't know what my life was going to be
like. I just looked at it as though anything might be possible: "I'll
just try everything and see how it goes."' In the following months, as
the dust settled, her physical recovery became more complete. But there
was one particular issue that was disturbing her enormously. 'I went to
the eye doctor a handful of times, saying, "There's something wrong with
my vision. I can't see properly,"

and he'd test my vision. It was fine. I had twenty-twenty, perfect
vision. And I just kept saying, "There's something wrong, I don't
understand this."' I ask Sheri to explain what it was she was
experiencing. She pauses for a while, formulating a response. 'When I
was at university, my visual memory was very good. For tests, I would
memorise pages of textbooks or my notes. But I have no visual memory
now. My mind is just blank.' She pauses again. 'I tried to explain it to
my mom. If you go to a movie theatre, the film is projected on a screen.
Say if, in your mind, there's a screen and you're able to project
anything you want on that screen, your mind just naturally does it.
We're not even aware of it. After the stroke, as soon as I would try and
project anything on that screen, it would dissolve. It was like there
was something wrong with the light bulb in the projector in my mind.'
Even now, I get the sense that Sheri struggles to really put her
situation into words. She likens it to a form of internal blindness, a
term that makes the most sense to her. She remembers being simply unable
to explain it any better. 'So, I just gave up thinking about it or
trying to explain it any more. I focused more on, "How do I live like
this?" Because I used that tool, that ability, so frequently. It was
tied up in my identity.' That capacity to conjure mental images was
crucial to her ability to paint, to think in a visual format. 'For me,
it wasn't just a tool that I used to remember things, or construct my
world. It was who I was. I just felt like I wasn't even human any more.
I couldn't imagine anything. And my imagination was where I lived.' For
years, Sheri did not fully understand what had happened to her. She had
made an almost full physical recovery from her stroke, but the lasting
legacy of it was in some ways its worst. The stroke had stolen her
vision -- not her ability to see the outside world, which was
untarnished, but her visual imagination. Her facility to conjure visual
images from memory had been completely wiped out. Her internal
projection screen had gone blank. 'For me, going from having such a
strong and vivid visual imagination to going completely internally blind
was more traumatic than having to learn how to walk again or read. That
was the most traumatic experience of having a stroke.' About five years
ago, Sheri got some answers. She was driving in her car, listening to
the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 'There was a programme on about
this condition that some people have, where they can't imagine anything
in their mind's eye. I had this wave come over me; I had

prickles go through my entire body and my jaw dropped, and I had to pull
over. I was literally shaking, because I could not believe what I was
hearing, and I thought, "This is what's going on. This is what I can't
do any more." It was so profound.' The voice that she heard on that
fateful day was that of Adam Zeman, a neurology colleague of mine based
in Exeter. Zeman had initially come across a patient, known as MX (not
his actual initials), a 65-year-old retired surveyor who had rather
abruptly lost the ability to visualise. Under normal circumstances, as
he was dropping off to sleep, he would 'see' the faces of friends and
family, events that had happened recently, or even buildings related to
his work. But all of this had disappeared a few days after he underwent
a cardiac procedure called an angioplasty. The procedure had involved
passing a wire into a large artery in his groin and up to the coronary
arteries, where stents had been introduced to expand narrowed blood
vessels. MX recalled having some vague symptoms during the procedure --
some tingling in the left arm and some internal head sensations -- but
scans and detailed testing did not reveal any other deficits in his
memory or perceptive abilities, nor did they reveal any obvious cause.
In addition to his loss of visual imagery, for a brief period he had
even lost the visual component of his dreams, but this had returned and
he was left without his mind's eye. Curiously, when tested by means of
tasks requiring visual imagery, such as mentally rotating
three-dimensional objects, he performed normally, if more slowly. It was
his awareness of visual imagery that was impaired, akin to blindsight,
the phenomenon of seeing without being aware, described in Chapter 5.
Having conducted extensive analysis of brain function, Zeman was able to
demonstrate clear differences between the areas of brain activation in
MX and in normal individuals during tasks requiring visual imagery,
confirming that MX's condition had an underlying neurological basis.
Zeman and his team suggested that MX's loss of his mind's eye was
related to a tiny stroke that must have occurred during his coronary
angioplasty. Zeman subsequently termed this loss of visual imagery
'aphantasia', Greek for 'without imagination'. However, it soon became
apparent that this phenomenon had been recognised earlier. In fact,
Francis Galton, a Victorian polymath and part-time inventor,
psychologist and controversial eugenicist, had published a study in 1880
in which he had asked 100 adult

men to describe the table at which they ate breakfast every morning. Of
those hundred, twelve men were almost entirely unable to give any sort
of description. They had always assumed that everyone else had the same
inability that they had to conjure up visual images, that the term
'mental imagery' was metaphorical, not literal. In addition to providing
the first description of aphantasia, Galton also demonstrated something
else important: that aphantasia did not result only from a stroke, as in
Sheri's or MX's cases, but could be found in normal individuals, and a
high proportion of normal individuals at that. Modern-day studies of
visual imagery have confirmed that, rather than aphantasia being a rare
phenomenon, it is quite common, affecting up to 3 per cent of people.
For most, visual imagery has been absent since birth, although typically
people only become aware of its absence as teenagers or young adults,
when conversations with others, or reading, makes them recognise the
existence of the mind's eye, and its absence in their own lives. For
Sheri, the effect of losing this mental faculty has been devastating. I
ask her how it has affected her on a day-to-day level. She begins to
answer, and then briefly pauses. 'That is a very overwhelming question,
actually...' She swallows, and continues. 'Before the stroke, I was a
figurative painter. I painted figures in acrylic paint, which is very
fast-drying. After the stroke, I couldn't paint in acrylics any more. I
basically retaught myself how to paint in oils. The other thing was that
I lost all of my visual memory of mixing paint. I'm having to relearn
how to mix colours pretty much every time I go to paint again.' As a
non-painter, it is hard for me to appreciate the impact of this, but
Sheri's art is her life's passion, her purpose. 'It's really emotional
to talk about this...' She stumbles, then continues. 'I don't really
know how else to explain it. Every time I approach the canvas, it's like
I'm not able to carry through what I was working on yesterday. I have to
relearn a bunch of stuff every day.' The process of painting has also
changed substantially for Sheri. She does not paint people any more; she
paints landscapes now and is more interested in atmosphere, trying to
capture a feeling rather than a specific image. Since becoming unable to
retain an image in her mind, she has taken photographs of landscapes to
work from. 'I hold the photograph when I paint. The photograph is in one
hand and my brush is in the other hand, and I'm constantly referencing
it, but I can't hold that image in my mind.' Her

stroke has changed both the actual paintings she produces and the
experience of painting. In the rest of her life, there have also been
some consequences. She is unable to visualise objects that are out of
sight; it is as if the existence of anything hidden from sight is
negated. 'I don't have doors on my kitchen cupboards because I can't see
what's inside. I have a door on my fridge, but I don't know what's
inside the fridge. If I'm cooking, my fridge door stays open.'
Throughout our conversation, I am listening to her rich voice as well as
her words. But there is an undertone of melancholy. I tell her that it
sounds like she is still grieving, in mourning for her mind's eye. She
laughs. 'Yeah, I have a little bit of trouble hiding that, don't I? It
was a part of myself and my life that I really indulged in. You know,
when you're having an off day and you can visualise something pleasant?
Or, if your grandmother passes away and you can still visualize her and
the memories that you had, and the times that you saw her? I don't have
any of that. For me, it's quite a lonely place. I don't have that sort
of visual imagery to keep me company in times of joy or sorrow. It's
just always blank, and so it feels like I'm living in a bit of an
abyss.' It seems, then, that it is not only our classical, 'external'
senses, the windows on our outside world, that are influenced by
glitches in our nervous system. Our 'internal' senses -- those mental
faculties that allow us to internalise our world, to recall it and bring
it into conscious awareness with eyes closed -- can also be impaired.
And there are further parallels with our classic 'external senses'. Most
obvious is that, as with Oliver and Dawn -- the former with his visual
limitation present since birth, the latter acquired later in life -- the
impact of the loss of a sense depends on whether you experienced life
with it or it has never been an intrinsic part of you. As Adam Zeman has
described, many people have never had visual imagery; aphantasia has
been present since the day they were born. Compare Sheri and her loss of
her mind's eye with one of her friends' experience of the condition.
Sheri says, 'I've actually discovered that one of my new friends lives
with aphantasia. We met at a dog event -- we have the same breed of dog
-- and I just felt like I could trust her right away. After we got
talking a little bit, she said, 'Oh, I live with this too, but I've
lived with it all my life.' The difference I notice between myself and
her is how, for her, it's just the

way it's always been. She's so calm and confident about it. It's part of
her, whereas for me it feels like a disability. And for her, it doesn't
at all.' Indeed, since having a name for her diagnosis, Sheri has met
many others with aphantasia. There has even been an exhibition of
artists all with aphantasia. Sheri says that, with some, she can detect
evidence of aphantasia in their art; with others it is impossible to
tell. And as Francis Galton and Adam Zeman have shown, aphantasia is
firmly on the spectrum of humanity. A small proportion of the population
have no mind's eye, despite having normal brains. In fact, the power of
the mind's eye itself is on a spectrum, with some individuals having an
extraordinary ability to visualise; others less so. In our abilities to
interpret the external, and indeed internal, world, we are all a little
different. Aphantasia therefore illustrates that our internal realities
may differ from each other, not only as a result of disease but as part
of the range of normal. But what about our external reality? Are there
examples of people for whom their entire reality, rather than a single
sense, is altered or different in any way? Of course, there are those
individuals with psychosis, those with hallucinations and delusions that
have a basis in psychiatric disease. As I touched upon earlier, one
possible way of considering these types of experience relates to
over-interpretation of sensory inputs, our own model of the world
overpowering what our senses are telling us. But there is another
category of individuals, healthy and 'normal' in every way, whose
reality is somewhat different from our own. James is one of these. He is
a synaesthete. He experiences synaesthesia -- the merging of two or more
senses. For him, this involves a fusion of hearing and taste. Now in his
sixties, it has been part of his life for as long as he can remember.
'My very first memories of sound having associated tastes and textures
were during daily trips to and from pre-school on the London
Underground. I was aged around four at the time, and my mother was
helping me with my reading and writing, so I'd spend the journey reading
out and writing down the names of the stations and their accompanying
tastes as we stopped or passed through them. After that, I moved on to
the overhead carriage maps. I still have some of those battered
notebooks from all those years ago and the name, food and flavour
matches described are exactly the same as they are today. I can also
specifically remember we used to have to recite the Lord's Prayer every
morning in my school. And

that used to bring on extremely strong bacon, textural tastes.' James
recalls mentioning this to his mother, but she would dismiss it. It did
not occur to him that not everyone had this experience of the world.
When he began to mention it to his school friends, he was generally
greeted with blank responses, disbelief or mild acceptance. But his
synaesthesia never really caused him a problem -- until he was about
fifteen. 'We used to have to sit yearly exams, which we would have in
big, echoey halls. We'd sit there and I'd be totally and utterly
distracted by the sounds, because the windows were always open -- it was
always in summer; or by a pencil rolling across a desk and then falling
off and clattering on the wood floor in the gym. It used to distract me
so much. Even reading the questions was very distracting. So I asked my
mum to take me to the doctor.' I can guess what a GP's response in the
1950s or '60s would have been, and James confirms it, laughing: 'He said
that from an early age I'd always had a wild imagination, and this was
just a phase that I would grow out of. That was his response.' It was a
harsh assessment by the GP, but understandable. Even now, some of the
things James talks about are utterly incomprehensible, almost
outlandish. Discussing his Tube journeys as a child, he says, 'My
favourite Tube station was Tottenham Court Road, because there's so many
lovely words in there. "Tottenham" produced the taste and texture of a
sausage; "Court" was like an egg -- a fried egg but not a runny fried
egg: a lovely crispy fried egg. And "Road" was toast. So there you've
got a pre-made breakfast. But further along the Central Line was one of
the worst ones, that used to taste like an aerosol can -- you know, the
aftertaste you get from hairspray. That was Bond Street.' At another
point in our conversation, we are discussing whether his synaesthesia
led him to make different personal decisions. When he looks back, he
notes that all his old friends had names that tasted nice. His
attraction to women has also been influenced by their names. Meanwhile,
one of his friends was married to a woman whose name tasted to James of
lumpy vomit -- he grimaces as he speaks her name. Needless to say, James
did not understand his friend's choice of partner. In fact, his entire
family has their own specific flavours and textures. 'My mother is
called Doreen. I call it a taste but it's more of an experience. It's
like the brain freeze you get when you have very, very cold water or ice
cream. And my father, whose name is Peter -- he tastes like tinned
processed peas. And my sister tastes of blackcurrant yoghurt. My
grandmother tastes

of very creamy, thick condensed milk. Her name is Mary. My grandfather,
William: he had a taste of crushed-up aspirin. That's pretty
unpleasant.' I somewhat tentatively ask him what my name tastes of, a
little fearful of the answer, hoping that I do not taste of lumpy vomit
like the unfortunate wife of his friend. 'It produces a word-sound that
gives me a taste and texture that's quite complex, but something similar
to fudge. It's not very sweet; it's quite bitter. But having met you in
person, and listening to your voice, puts another layer over the top of
it and it sort of develops. The taste and texture of fudge is still
there but there's an added sweetness, which is rather nice.' I breathe a
sigh of relief, and tell him I can live with that. I spend some time
with James, trying to comprehend. It quickly becomes apparent that it is
not as simple as hearing and taste; James is describing an actual
mouth-feel, the texture, taste and odour of a particular substance. In
essence, the flavour rather than simply the taste. And while this
phenomenon occurs predominantly with word-sounds, this is not
exclusively so. The example of the pencil rolling onto the floor in the
exam room comes to mind, but James also finds that music evokes flavour
in the same way. He says, 'Listening to music is fantastic because music
produces mostly sweet kinds of tastes. Very textural tastes as well, and
that's lovely. I couldn't imagine listening to music without having that
as well, because it's all part of the experience.' Gentle piano music
tastes of tinned pineapple chunks. Heavy metal is the chocolate on top
of a digestive biscuit. 'I don't like live music so much. Jazz music,
for example, is a bit of a nightmare, because the mix of tastes and
textures in there is one after the other. It's like stuffing loads of
food in your mouth.' It is clear, however, that it is not simply a
question of the sound of a word or music. There is a semantic element to
all this. James has created a version of Harry Beck's original map of
the London Underground with the names of the stations replaced with the
flavours that James experiences with their sounds. Waterloo tastes of
sparkling water, Kilburn tastes of rotten meat (presumably related to
'kill'), Holborn of burned matches ('born' sounding like 'burn',
perhaps), Liverpool Street, not surprisingly, of liver and onions. There
are several examples of these more obvious associations, but for the
majority I cannot figure out the code. And it is not even the actual
sound that triggers flavours for James. He says that inner speech can
have the same effect, and even looking at objects

can precipitate this experience. As we talk, he is looking around his
sitting room. His gaze settles on the television screen: 'I get the
taste and texture of jelly whenever I see one,' he says (perhaps due to
rhyming with 'telly'). There is a red armchair in the corner of the
room. I ask him if it, too, is giving him a taste. 'Yes -- it's a bit
like the residue you get at the bottom of a jam jar. You know, that
thick, gooey muck at the bottom, slightly liquidy.' It all sounds
extremely far-fetched, and I can understand James' GP's disbelief. But
despite his vivid tales, there is evidence that James' experiences are
very real, not just the product of a bountiful imagination. For a start,
the flavours of words or objects are totally fixed. A look through his
childhood notebooks confirms that the flavours of Tube stations now are
the same as they ever were. The tastes of people's names, of Tube
stations, are immutable. Of course, he may simply have a very good
memory, but these associations are so numerous that James would be
extremely hardpressed to remember every single one. It is possibly
persuasive, but not definitive of synaesthesia being a real phenomenon.
For some synaesthetes, the rules governing their associations are so
complex that they cannot voice them or even understand them; such rules
have taken specialists in psycholinguistics years to unravel. Even more
convincing, however, are studies of the brains of synaesthetes. Using
the almost ubiquitous tool of the neuroscientist, functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), researchers have clearly demonstrated
differences between synaesthetes and non-synaesthetes. For example, for
those who report perceiving colours from words or letters, during
language comprehension tasks the colour-selective regions of the brain
light up. This definitively shows an underlying neurological basis for
their experience of the world. Other studies have shown areas of
hyperconnectivity within the brains of synaesthetes. There are clear
expansions of connecting tracts between different parts of the cerebral
cortex that presumably mediate this cross-talk between the senses. A
third line of evidence comes from genetic studies. These have identified
areas of the human genome linked to synaesthesia, obviously implying a
genetic basis to the phenomenon. This supports the observation that
synaesthesia tends to run in families. Here, once again, Francis Galton
pops up, having published a paper in Nature in 1880 entitled 'Visualised
numerals'. While Galton does not use the term 'synaesthesia', this is
clearly

what is being referred to; he describes many cases of individuals who
see numbers when they are spoken: The writer is an office-bearer of one
of our scientific societies: 'If words such as fifty-six be spoken, I
most clearly, easily and instantly visualise the figures. I do so almost
automatically. I perceive that when I speak the word "thousand" or hear
it spoken, the figures at once group themselves together ... The figures
are always printed; in type and size they resemble those commonly used
for the headings of newspapers. I cannot, however, appreciate a
back-ground, the figures appear simply in space.' In the same paper, he
goes on to describe individuals with family members who experience
something similar, and specifically comments on the role of heredity in
this trait; an early recognition of the role of genetics in
synaesthesia. As Galton hints at, synaesthesia does not purely involve
the merging of sounds and flavours, but can affect other senses too.
Valeria experiences a different form of synaesthesia, one that she has
put to good use. Now in her mid-twenties, she is studying music
psychology in London, while also working as a musician and singer. We
meet in the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden, where she works
part-time. She is bright-eyed, with a broad, ready smile, and speaks
with the gentle sing-song intonation of a native Italian-speaker. I ask
her when she first realised that she was different from other people. 'I
was thirteen or fourteen years old. At school, we had to prepare a short
film, maybe ten minutes, about a book. I was asked to do the music for
it, because they knew I played piano. I remember talking to my dad about
this, and I said, "I could make it in D major, because the cover of the
book is green." He could not understand what I was talking about. I told
him, "The cover of the book is green, D major is green. It would be nice
to do it in the same colour." He was like, "We don't usually see colours
when we hear music."' And that was Valeria's first indication that her
world was different from that of those around her. Her synaesthesia has
always been there. 'You just don't think about it; you just have both at
the same time. It's like when you eat something and you also smell it.
It was the same for me with music and colours -- it's like

textures and sensations, when you talk to your piano teacher about how a
piece of music feels, the things you say about the musicality and
interpretation of a piece. But I never realised that it was just a
metaphor, not actually real. When I realised it wasn't normal, I started
to keep it to myself.' As we talk, she begins to tinkle on the grand
piano, the foyer of the Royal Opera House filling with music. She starts
to play that original composition based upon the green book. As she
moves through the piece, she describes how she experiences the music.
She plays a chord, and tells me, 'This chord is very green and fresh. It
almost feels like if you cut a lime in two and you touch the inside of
it -- that sensation, it's what I feel when I play this.' As she changes
key, she says the colour has changed to blue. I ask her if she sees
these colours only in her mind's eye, or if it intrudes into her real
visual world. 'It's here,' she says, holding her hand up to the side of
her head, 'in my peripheral vision. As if I had a light just behind my
head, projecting this way. I don't see the light in front of me but I
see the aura, all around my peripheral vision. If I try and look at it,
it's difficult because it moves with me.' Another key shift, another
visual experience: 'It's the blending of the two colours. So, it's as if
the green was wiped away with a brush of blue. And this fifth,' she
plays a final chord, 'it's a dot of yellow in the blue.' And Valeria's
experience of the music is not just auditory and visual. Music is a
sensory experience for her, too; she feels textures on her skin. 'It can
be either a good or a bad sensation. Most of the time I feel something
kind of hugging me -- the upper back, the shoulders and the arms. That's
usually a good sensation. Whereas if I'm playing this,' -- a loud,
crashing, unpleasant chord -- 'these chords are quite sharp and the
colour is a yellow, but quite a stabbing yellow. And I feel it right
here in my lower back. It feels slightly more uncomfortable.' She stops
playing her own composition, and moves to Debussy's First Arabesque. As
she plays, she also paints a verbal picture, although for her of course
it is a literal picture. She plays a single note, and tells me, 'You
start with that dot of sound. It's a ball of sound and colour, and then
it becomes more blue and much, much deeper. But it's not watercolours;
it's very present. It's like oil on canvas. It's something much more
real and intense, as if you took a brush, you put it in paint and you
are adding one

colour to the other. And they don't really mix. It's not like if you put
the blue on top of the yellow you get green. You get layers of colours,
as with layers of sound.' All this time she continues to play, and with
each chord and each change in key she describes new colours and new
sensations -- bright oranges, indigos, purples, yellows, matched with
feelings of warmth on the face, an ocean breeze, a stabbing sensation
around her spine. I am reminded of son-et-lumiÃ¨re shows, where music is
matched to light displays and fireworks. It must be amazing to have
that, day in, day out, woven into the fabric of your life. Valeria seems
to experience music on a totally different level. There are some pieces
that for her do not quite work on a visual or sensory level, whereas
some composers seem particularly apt at matching the sound of the music
to its visual or sensory experience. 'I am convinced Debussy, Ravel,
Alberniz -- they were all synaesthetes. The fact that they put so many
colours and so many variations in the music makes me wonder whether they
were seeing reality with different colours as well. 'There is one
sensation that is just utter beauty,' she tells me, when she has stopped
playing. 'That's the sensation that I get when I cry with happiness.' I
am expecting her to report some beautiful physical phenomenon, but to my
surprise, she continues, 'And that's when I get the pain in my thumb.
It's strange because it's a pain, but I feel so happy. It has happened
very few times in my life, when I've been listening to very specific
pieces of music. One of them is Beethoven's Ninth. There is one moment
where my thumb is so painful, but that pain is the most beautiful thing.
Everything is just so full of colours and textures. Actually, Ravel's
Piano Concerto is another one. There is one moment when the oboe comes
in. That's just perfection...' While Valeria's hearing-induced vision is
the most common type of synaesthesia, the condition comes in many
different guises -- visions generated by touch, tastes generated by
words (as in James' case) or any other possible permutation of sensory
crossover. It might, however, be a misrepresentation to consider
synaesthesia as purely a merging of the senses. For some synaesthetes
that is indeed the case, but for others it is not quite so
straightforward. The triggers for these cross-modality experiences may
not be raw sensory experiences, but higher-order cognitive constructs,
with something more abstract generating these synaesthetic experiences.
Consider James and his word--taste synaesthesia. For at least some of
his

pairings, it seems that the relationship is defined by the meaning or
root of the words themselves. For him, there is a linguistic or semantic
element to all this, not purely auditory. For others, certain words
beginning with the same letter may elicit the same colour, despite the
words being pronounced differently -- e.g.Â popcorn, psychiatry, phone.
Some synaesthetes experience different colours with different letters of
the alphabet. For some it may be the sound of the letter; for others the
geometry of the letters; for others still it may be that a letter, no
matter how it is written -- in whatever font, capitalised or lower-case
-- may precipitate the same colour, once again implying that the origins
of their synaesthesia are more complex than the raw sensory experience.
Indeed, some of the experiences of synaesthesia seem to move
significantly away from a simple merging of the senses. Some
synaesthetes experience sequences like letters, numbers or months of the
year as having different genders or personalities -- the letter P
representing a male or a sad person, for example. Others experience time
mapped out in space, for example the days of the week laid out in an
ellipse in front of them. Some experts argue that there are as many as
150 different types of synaesthesia, depending how carefully they are
defined. What is clear is that synaesthesia fundamentally alters the way
people experience the world. And this is not a rare condition. Estimates
of its frequency vary, but some studies suggest that as many as one in
twenty individuals may experience elements of synaesthesia, although
they may not always be aware of it. The vast majority of these
individuals are 'normal' -- normal brains, normal genes, no toxins, no
pathology; they are normal human beings in every way. But their reality
may be subtly, or in some cases not so subtly, different from others'.
If synaesthesia is so common and has an underlying genetic basis, then
we need to ask why the genes that contribute to it have become so
prevalent. What is the evolutionary advantage of having synaesthesia?
For Valeria, one can understand how the possession of her synaesthesia
might make her a better musician or composer, more creative, more
gifted. She says, 'Being a singer and a musician, a big component of
what I call my musicality is due to synaesthesia. Because naturally when
you have preferences for a texture or a colour, you express that in your
practice and in your playing, or your singing. And that definitely
informs my way of being

in the music profession.' Indeed, synaesthetes are more likely than the
average person to be engaged in artistic pursuits. However, it is
difficult to immediately see how this confers an evolutionary advantage,
a skill that is likely to improve the odds of survival for you and your
offspring. But it may be that the creativity is a red herring, a side
effect of having a hyperconnected brain. The presence of synaesthesia
may make you better able to perceive or understand your external
environment, and it is this that facilitates your survival. Imagine the
sound of a twig snapping, signifying the presence of prey or predator.
If that sound is accompanied by a flash of red in your vision, you can
begin to see why that might put you at an advantage. Studies of
synaesthetes have shown that when they hear words in languages they are
unfamiliar with, they are better able to guess the meanings of the words
just from their sound. So, if, as a prehistoric man, you are in a cave
trying to develop a language system in your tribe, if you are a
synaesthete you may be better at guessing what your compatriot's grunts
mean. Better communication results in more successful hunting, gathering
and security. This may translate in modern times to being
extraordinarily adept with words. Similarly, other types of synaesthetes
may have advantages in other sensory spheres. The possible benefits of
synaesthesia are likely balanced with disadvantages. It may enrich one's
life, but it may also trouble you. It can be incredibly distracting.
Valeria gives an example of this. 'So, let's say I have to learn a piece
as a character, maybe in musical theatre. You have a very specific
sensation about the song, but the character has a completely different
one, and you have to be able to dissociate what is yours and what is the
character's.' For her, if the colours or the feelings of the song are
different in quality from what the character is trying to portray, this
can be quite a challenge. James reports something very similar. As well
as the experience of the exam hall in childhood, he describes many other
examples. 'I can walk into a room and I'll get a taste,' he says. 'And
if it is a particularly strong one, I find that very distracting. I'll
have to look around to see what's producing that.' In a busy
environment, the constant drip of mouth-feels and flavours, one after
the other, like a never-ending buffet of clashing foods, can make it
very difficult to focus. When I talk to Julia Simner, one of the UK's
experts on synaesthesia, she cites two other examples, both patients who
are children. One young girl would struggle to

breathe whenever people talked about hair, because she would feel it in
her throat. Another had a pathological fear of the number four, because
for her number four was a bully. A more recent observation is that
people with autism tend to display synaesthesia more frequently than
usual. The nature of this association is not yet fully understood, but
may have its basis in brain organisational changes or underlying
alterations to the brain's processes of perception. But it is striking
that a tendency to sensory overload is something that is frequently seen
in individuals with autistic spectrum disorder. Many people with ASD
find that too much sensory input, for example in a busy location with
lots of sights and noises, can be totally overwhelming. It may be, in
part, that synaesthesia relates to the excessive sensory experience of
the world. You may be asking yourself why I am telling you all this.
Apart from the curiosity of these people's experiences, what is the
relevance to previous chapters of this book? Well, throughout its pages
we have seen the fragility of our relationship with the reality around
us. Our senses, supposedly the conveyors of precise, accurate and
sensitive information about our world, should perhaps be better
considered as interpreters of data that may help us in the pursuit of
our life's purpose: to find food, find a partner, procreate -- to ensure
the ongoing survival of our genes. What they tell us about the physical
nature of our world may be limited, subject to abstraction or simply a
form of shorthand, to facilitate our lives. And that this relationship
is ultimately highly dependent upon the functional and structural
integrity of our nervous systems -- the mechanisms that capture this
information from beyond our bodies and translate those signals into
something meaningful. As we have seen, disease states, injuries or other
pathological processes can have a potent influence on our understanding
of the world, but so can the range of normal human variation. Consider
this thought-experiment. Ten synaesthetes sit around a table, gazing at
a red apple. All of these individuals are normal but will each have a
different experience of that apple. One, for example, may experience the
apple as having the taste of Coca-Cola as he gazes upon it. Another may
feel a prickling on the back of his neck as he looks at it; the apple
'feels' prickly to him. A third may hear water flowing as she sits
there, triggered by the redness of that apple; for her, the red apple
burbles like a stream.

And so on -- each person's experience different, each person's apple
real to them. Ten different realities. I put this scenario to James and
ask him which of the ten synaesthetes is experiencing the true reality.
He replies, very matter-of-fact, 'They're all experiencing different
forms of reality.' So, there are multiple realities, of which no single
one is the only true reality. Here's another thought-experiment. Imagine
that every single human on this earth has Valeria's gift, that we all
have her music--colour synaesthesia. Each and every one of us would see
lime green with the D major key. All of us would see and feel the same
things with the same pieces of music. The fact that sounds are colourful
or full of sensation would be reality -- the reality of the human
experience. That reality would of course be a function of that
hyperconnectivity of our brains, of the neurological changes that
underlie synaesthesia. But that underlines the point that the lack of
this link now -- the reality that we currently accept -- is also
entirely dependent on our brains, in the absence of this
hyperconnectivity. Our reality is a product of our bodies, a construct
of our brains. You may argue that my take on this is too simplistic and
naive. You may counter that these scenarios of synaesthetes and multiple
realities are flawed; that when one considers another world, one where
almost everyone is red--green colour blind but a few can see in full
colour, this does not reflect different realities, only different
abilities to translate true physical properties into experiences. The
perception of colour is different in these two groups, but in both cases
reflect the immutable physical properties of reflection of light by the
molecules of the objects we see. You may view this as intrinsically
different from the synaesthesia scenario, where perceptions such as
colours from music have no real basis in the physical world. However, if
there is one message in this book, it is that our perceptions are often
far removed from the physical. Our experiences and cold, hard reality
can be almost entirely divorced, as with molecules of a particular
structure and our experience of smell or flavour. Our experience of the
world is a label for an interaction with our environment, a construct of
our brains. So if we were all to be synaesthetes, and our synaesthesia
were to follow rules -- all right-angled objects smell of roses, all
round objects smell of cheese -- our perception of these objects would
indeed relate to their physical properties.

Regardless of your take on this, for Valeria, James and others like
them, there is something quite magical in the way they experience life
when compared with those of us without this gift. As Valeria says, 'I am
appreciative of my synaesthesia. I know it is something quite special,
to be able to see colours when you hear music. It is like going to a
museum or gallery and listening to the paintings. I know how special it
is. Do I take it for granted? Sometimes, yes I do, because it has always
been there.' She pauses briefly to think. 'There are so many ways of
experiencing the world.' OceanofPDF.com

EPILOGUE THE TRUTH ABOUT THE TRUTH

'All our knowledge begins with the senses, proceeds then to
understanding, and ends with reason.' Immanuel Kant

Failure is the human condition. Failure of body comes to us all in the
end. A few of us are lucky, but for most of us, failure of body and mind
is an accompaniment to life. I have been fortunate thus far, and have
escaped serious ill health. But my body is no stranger to failure. I am
extremely short-sighted, blind as the proverbial bat, and have been
wearing glasses or contact lenses since I was seven years old. At school
I played a lot of rugby, and until fairly late on, when contact lenses
became more mainstream, I spent hours every week on the rugby field,
flailing around in a blurry world. Waiting to catch a ball kicked high
into the air was largely guesswork, the clear, oval form crystallising
in my vision only a split second before arriving in my arms (or landing
on the ground, as was often the case). My teammates were identifiable
only by the dark blue of their jerseys, and were otherwise
indistinguishable to me. The only saving grace was my size and strength,
which made up for my other deficits. But ultimately, I knew that I would
only have to put on my glasses and my vision would return to normal; my
experience of the world would be the same as my classmates. I have
endured other examples of failure of body too, some mundane and
fleeting, others slightly more significant. There's the regular
experience of sitting in a strange position, compressing my common
peroneal nerve as it passes over the head of my fibula, the bony
prominence just below the outer aspect of my knee. Realising, just a
moment too late, that the foot I think I

have placed on the floor as I have risen from my chair simply is not
there. I have no knowledge of where my foot is, cannot even feel its
presence, and I stumble and fall. Then there's the time I got a new
bike, and had the set-up slightly wrong. Prolonged pressure on my hands
and wrists from resting on the handlebars resulted in an ulnar palsy,
the compression of one of the nerves supplying my hand. For several
weeks afterwards, I was left with a deep, niggling ache in my arm,
indeterminable in origin and not relieved by any contortion of my arm or
hand. It was only when I went to turn the key in the front door or tried
to chop an onion that I realised that the power in my right hand was
missing. Self-examination also revealed some diminished sensation in the
little finger, and I was toying with badgering one of my colleagues for
some electrical studies when I saw that it was recovering on its own.
Despite knowing precisely what the problem was, and it only lasting a
few short weeks, this episode was a deeply disconcerting experience --
not because it highlighted my physical frailty, my vulnerability to
medical issues just like everyone else, although that in itself was
enough. Rather, it was the fact that it had taken me a couple of weeks
to realise that the power and sensation in my hand was abnormal; that my
own powers of perception could be so fragile as to not notice a deficit
in my own body. I did not have the excuse of Oliver and his missing
visual field, or Paul and his absence of pain, both conditions present
since birth, both men having never known anything else. My problem had
come on acutely, one moment having normal sensation and power, the next
numbness and weakness. It led me to doubt my own faculties, my own
senses, the veracity of my own body's witnessing of the world in
question -- a personal illustration of the gulf between reality and
perception. 'Perception is nothing more than a controlled
hallucination.' This is a commonly used sentence in the world of
cognitive neuroscience. Essentially, our brains work as guessing
machines, interpreting what is coming in through our senses in the
context of our model of the world. What we perceive relates to our
existing beliefs about the world, to how the information our senses
provide us with interacts with our virtual-reality simulation of the
universe. The evidence for this is all around us, in the form of
illusions, such as those I have described in this book. To pick up on
just two, many of us are

familiar with the experience of feeling our phone vibrating in our
pocket when we're expecting a call. Despite repeatedly pulling the phone
out to find there is no missed call, the illusion will persist. Then
there's that viral internet meme, the black and blue dress -- or was it
really white and gold? The true perception of the colours of this dress
may have been influenced by our expectation of lighting conditions --
one study suggests that early risers are more likely to think that the
dress is lit by natural light, while night owls tend to interpret it as
being lit by artificial light. The colours of the dress in the photo
were perceived accordingly, with morning larks more likely to say white
and gold, and nightjars reporting black and blue. These examples
illustrate that our expectations of what is likely to be present or
about to happen directly influence our perception of our world. And as
we have previously discussed, there is a pressing need for this way of
doing things. Without an element of prediction, the system would break
down. In the absence of prediction, there are three insurmountable
problems: the inherent delay of sensory information before it reaches
our brains means that what we perceive has already happened; our nervous
systems do not have the bandwidth to convey every single bit of sensory
signal to our brains, nor do our brains have the power to process it;
there is intrinsic ambiguity in any sensory information, and to resolve
it needs a best guess. And so, this idea of 'controlled hallucination'
recognises the concept that while our senses are vital to understanding
the world around us, our perception of the world is firmly rooted in our
brain's own virtual reality. What the senses are telling us feeds into
this simulated environment to help us understand these signals. When our
senses clash with our own internal view of the world, this may give rise
to illusions like those described above or, in extreme situations, when
our inner simulation is more chaotic or frenzied, full-blown psychosis.
Even from this starting point, we already recognise that there is
deviation between true reality -- the cold, hard molecules around us --
and our perception of it. What we perceive to be real is to some extent
a figment of our own minds, a construct of the networks of neurones that
constitute our brains. But for some cognitive neuroscientists, this is
too conservative an explanation, too literal a view of the world. There
are some scientists who

would go as far as to argue that we have absolutely no fundamental
understanding of what reality actually is. These are not quacks, not
scientific pseudo-babblers, but respected, eminent individuals. People
like Donald D. Hoffman, a professor at University of California, Irvine.
Hoffman proposes that, contrary to our brains trying to represent
reality for us, they have developed to actually hide it from us. Our
minds construct a simplified or codified world to enable us to survive.
Even as I write this sentence, it seems bonkers, totally ridiculous, no
matter how many times I have read or heard his hypothesis, because it is
so counterintuitive to what I 'know', what I experience on a daily
basis. The orthodox view, one that Hoffman does not share, is that,
while we do not see reality as a whole, we do see those aspects of
reality that we need to survive; so, when we look upon an object, that
object is actually present, and there are aspects of it that we perceive
-- the red apple on the table does indeed have physical properties that
confer redness or its shape. There are truths of the world that it is
important for us to perceive, to enable our survival, and we perceive
those fairly accurately. What we see is a reasonable summary of the
atoms and their properties that constitute that apple. There are other
truths about our world, however, that make little difference to our
survival, and therefore evolution has not pressured us into seeing these
truths. An excellent example of this is electromagnetic radiation. We
perceive visible light, but this is only a very small range of the
electromagnetic spectrum. We are surrounded by radio waves and cosmic
rays, all of which are invisible to us. While they potentially cause us
some harm, they are unlikely to kill us before we pass on our genes.
There has never been any evolutionary imperative for organisms to
perceive these rays. But Hoffman's view is somewhat different. In fact,
he describes this orthodox view as 'fundamentally wrong all the way
down'. Hoffman actually questions the very nature of reality. He tells
me, 'I think that our best scientific theories -- namely, evolution by
natural selection, quantum mechanics and Einstein's theory of space-time
(general relativity) -- are all pointing to the same conclusion. We've
believed for centuries that space and time, or their combination into
what we call space-time, is fundamental, objective reality. And that the
contents of space-time, like atomic particles, are therefore part of
objective reality. But our best science is now telling us

that space-time is doomed, that space-time is not fundamental, and that
we're going to have to look for some deeper understanding of reality
that's outside of space and time.' Hoffman argues that although our
brains create perceptions of space and time, of physical objects, these
are not a picture of reality. He terms this a 'user interface', there
explicitly to hide the nature of reality, to simply enable us to
survive, while we are utterly ignorant of what we are actually doing in
reality. He likens it to a computer desktop. When we click on an icon to
open a document on our computer, what we see is simply a representation.
The small white icon with the blue W of Microsoft Word tells us nothing
about the internal wiring of the computer, nor the nature of the digital
code, the series of 0s and 1s that constitute the encoded data. It is
simply a representation that provides a useable format. Hoffman's
hypothesis sounds crazy, but is supported by some evidence.
Nevertheless, I cannot get my head around it. I tell him it all sounds
very redolent of The Matrix, referring to the trilogy of sci-fi films,
in which Keanu Reeves plays the main character, Neo. Hoffman responds,
'Yes, but in The Matrix, when Neo steps out of the matrix, he steps into
a space-time world. So, I'm saying something even more radical. If we
could take off our space-time headset, we would be in the real world,
which has no notion of space and time at all.' Our perceptions do not
have the capabilities to show us the truth. Hoffman's theory is the
subject of a book, and perception in general could generate another ten
books. But I tell you all this to highlight that even the traditional,
orthodox view of perception, which sits at the other end of the spectrum
from Hoffman's, is that we are not necessarily aware of reality and that
our brains tell us what we want or need to hear, see, feel, smell or
taste. The truth is not necessarily what we perceive it to be. Of
course, the pathway to perception is a two-way street. Our ultimate
experiences are a balance between sensory inputs coming in and our
internal model of the world, a delicate equilibrium between 'bottom-up'
and 'top-down' flows of information. But even our internal model, our
virtualreality environment, is fundamentally a function of our senses.
Our internal model of our world is constantly tweaked, adjusted and
fine-tuned, according to our experiences. This is how we learn to walk,
talk, interact. It is even how we learn to see or hear. These are not
skills we instantly possess from the moment we are born. Our senses are
the windows to the

outside world, the interface between ourselves and everything else, and
that leads to our understanding of it. In the words of Aristotle, 'The
senses are gateways to the intelligence. There is nothing in the
intelligence which did not first pass through the senses.' The senses
are the foundations for everything we are, everything we know,
everything we believe, our values and our ethics. But, as illustrated by
the extraordinary people whose stories I have been permitted to tell,
these foundations are built on sand, not bedrock. A small earthquake,
even a little tremor, in the form of damage or disease, can shake these
foundations and make the walls of our reality tumble to the ground. The
stories of the individuals in this book also raise a philosophical
issue. Firstly, they demonstrate some of the shortcomings in one of the
core problems in philosophy of mind, the discipline concerned with what
constitutes mental properties like perception and consciousness. The
'mind-- body' problem, introduced some four centuries ago by RenÃ©
Descartes, tries to address the relationship between what constitutes
our physical and mental being. For Descartes, the mind and body were
made of different matter, each influencing the other but entirely
separate. The nature of this relationship, between our spiritual mind --
what comprises our free will, our mind, our soul -- and our physical
body remains an ongoing philosophical discussion, particularly when it
comes to the nature of consciousness. I am, however, a physician and a
scientist. I make no pretence at being a philosopher. In my view, it is
likely that the physical nature of our bodies explains all aspects of
our minds, that this dualism of body and mind is a false dichotomy. The
individuals in this book, and their experiences of the world, potently
illustrate that tiny physical changes can fundamentally alter not only
our senses, but also our perceptions and our realities. They can
influence our universe and influence our consciousness, directly
demonstrating that our conscious mind is a function of our biology. I
think specifically of Paul, whose entire world -- whose understanding of
the universe -- is dependent on a tiny change in his genetic code. I
empathise with him, I can rationalise his absence of pain, understand
the impact, but can I truly comprehend what it is like to be him, to
perceive the world in the way he does? I cannot for a moment put myself
inside his mind -- and all as a result of the change to a base pair in
the sequence of his DNA.

As I write, we are in the midst of the second wave of Covid-19 in the
UK. This morning I awoke to see a news story about one of the junior
doctors at the hospital where I work being confronted by Covid deniers
protesting outside as he left after a night shift. I am filled with
anger at these morons, those who are anti-vaxxers and anti-scientists,
the commentators who downplay the truth of what is happening -- people
so certain of themselves, of their world view, of their version of the
truth, unquestioning, undoubting, unexamining of the evidence. This is,
however, only a small part of the overall picture. We live in a cleaved
world; increasingly polarised, with different world views. Brexit has
fractured our society in the UK, albeit down predictable fault lines,
and US politics is arguably worse, with its gross partisanship fuelled
by the past few years. All around us, we see divergence of politics, of
world views, of opinions. There are, of course, ultimate truths (at
least if you discount Hoffman's theory) -- facts that do not rely on our
perception or opinions, but are dependent on measurement or the physical
rules of our world. For pretty much everything in the human sphere,
however, it is perhaps not surprising that world views are discordant:
'I know this to be the truth, as I have heard it with my own ears, seen
it with my own eyes.' Our understanding of the world is firmly rooted in
our senses, but these senses are fallible and inconsistent, vulnerable
to differences between individuals and to disease. While this is no
excuse for idiocy, it is at least some sort of explanation for why each
of us sees a different world and hears a different meaning. Certainty in
our own beliefs, in our knowledge of the absolute truths of our world,
is dangerous without a degree of questioning, or an examination of
evidence to the contrary. Perhaps the faith we have in our own senses is
misplaced. Our nervous systems are like the man behind the curtain in
the Wizard of Oz, pulling the levers and pressing the buttons that make
the magic happen. We ignore the basis of our reality at our peril.
OceanofPDF.com

GLOSSARY OF TERMS

affective Relating to mood or feelings. amygdala An almond-shaped
structure deep in the temporal lobe of the brain, part of the limbic
system, with a primary role in emotional response, particularly fear.
aneurysm An outpouching of an artery, usually caused by weakness of the
blood vessel wall. The resulting abnormality is liable to rupture,
causing devastating bleeding. anosmia The inability to smell. antibody A
blood protein produced by the immune system that acts to bind to and
counteract alien substances such as infectious agents. Sometimes
antibodies are produced that bind to substances within the body,
resulting in auto-immune disease. aphantasia The absence of the ability
to conjure up mental imagery, the loss of the 'mind's eye'. aura The
prelude to a seizure or migraine attack, usually but not always
manifesting as visual disturbance. The symptoms relate to abnormal
electrical activity in a specific area of the brain, typically the
occipital cortex. basilar membrane The membrane extending throughout the
cochlea, the vibration of which is fundamental to the process of
hearing. blindsight The ability to respond to objects in the field of
vision, without conscious perception of those objects. brainstem The
central trunk of the brain, containing all the tracts that flow between
the brain and the spinal cord, as well as centres responsible for basic
functions like breathing, heart rate, eye movements and swallowing. It
consists of the midbrain, the pons and medulla.

cerebellum The region of the brain at the back of the skull, its primary
role being in the coordination and regulation of muscle activity and
balance. cerebral cortex The outer layer of the brain, composing of
folded grey matter. It plays a fundamental role in consciousness and
higher order neurological functions such as cognition, speech and
orientation in space. Its precise function relates to its location in
the brain. Charles Bonnet syndrome The experience of visual
hallucinations in the presence of eye disease causing visual impairment,
with normal neurological function. cingulate cortex The area of the
cerebral cortex deep in the midline, constituting part of the limbic
system and thus important for emotional processing, learning and memory.
It is highly involved in linking motivation to behaviours. cochlea The
hollow spiral-shaped bone deep in the inner ear, that contains the
apparatus to convert the mechanical energy of sound into the electrical
energy of nerve impulses. cornea The transparent layer constituting the
front of the eye, overlying the pupil and iris. cribriform plate The
bony structure separating the nasal cavity from the inside of the
cranium, it contains multiple perforations through which the nerve
fibres responsible for smell run. deafferentation theory The concept
that the removal of inputs to a neurone or network of neurones results
in chemical and/or structural changes that promote spontaneous
electrical activity in the absence of those inputs. delusion An abnormal
fixed belief held despite being contradicted by rational argument or
reality; typically a feature of psychosis. dorsal columns Tracts within
the aspect of the spinal cord closest to the back, responsible for the
transmission of sensory information related to light touch, vibration
and proprioception, from the body to the brain. endolymph The fluid
that, along with perilymph, fills the hollow structures of the inner
ear. The accumulation of endolymph is thought to underlie the
development of MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease.

entorhinal cortex A region of the cerebral cortex that sits deep in the
temporal lobe, with an important role in the formation of
autobiographical and spatial memories. fovea The region of the retina
which detects visual inputs in the centre of the field of vision, where
receptors are highly concentrated to provide maximum resolution.
gustatory Relating to taste. hallucination The perception of something
in the absence of anything present. Like delusions, hallucinations are
typical of psychosis, but can also occur in a range of neurological
disorders or in normal life. In psychosis, these hallucinations are held
to be real. hippocampus A major component of the temporal lobe, closely
linked to the entorhinal cortex, with an important role in the
deposition of longterm memories. In Alzheimer's disease, the hippocampus
is often an early location of brain shrinkage. homunculus The
representation of the human body within the sensory cortex of the brain;
it is distorted so that sensitive parts of the body are hugely
over-represented compared to less sensitive areas. illusion An incorrect
or misinterpreted perception of a sensory stimulus. This contrasts with
a hallucination, where a sensory stimulus is absent. limbic system A
network of structures primarily concerned with basic emotions such as
fear, pleasure and anger, as well as drives such as hunger, thirst or
sex. The limbic system also receives a wide array of inputs related to
smell, taste and memory. meningioma A (usually) benign tumour derived
from the meninges, the membranous coverings of the brain. These tumours
will cause damage through compression or displacement of brain or nerve
tissue, although the incidental finding of a meningioma causing no
problems at all is common. mucosa The membranes lining body cavities or
organs that are in direct or indirect contact with the outside world,
and are kept moist by the presence of mucous glands. These include the
linings of the mouth, nose, respiratory system and gut.

multiple sclerosis (MS) A disorder that results in recurrent
inflammation of the central nervous system, resulting in relapses
characterised by episodes of neurological dysfunction such as visual
loss, numbness, weakness or bladder dysfunction. The cause of multiple
sclerosis is not fully understood, but it is considered an auto-immune
disease. neurone A nerve cell; the essential building block of the
nervous system that transmits electrical impulses. nociception The
process of sensing and perceiving any noxious (potentially damaging)
sensory stimuli, including chemical, mechanical or extreme thermal
triggers. occipital Relating to the area at the back of the brain, the
occipital lobes, primarily responsible for visual perception and
processing. olfactory Relating to smell. olfactory bulb The area of the
olfactory nerve that sits immediately above the cribriform plate and
initially receives smell information from the smell receptors in the
nasal mucosa. olfactory groove The shallow depression in the cribriform
plate filled by the olfactory bulb. olfactory nerve The cranial nerve
that runs from the nasal cavity to the brain and is the conduit for all
smell information. optic chiasm The area of the nervous system where the
optic nerves meet and cross, resulting in an initial integration of
information from both eyes. optic disc The area of the retina that is
the point of entry of the optic nerves. It lacks photoreceptors and
therefore represents the physiological blind spot. optic nerve The
cranial nerves that conduct information from each eye towards the brain.
The two optic nerves meet at the optic chiasm. orbitofrontal cortex The
area of the cerebral cortex at the front of the brain immediately above
the eye sockets. It has a role in decision-making, and in particular
expected rewards or punishments related to a particular action. This
region is implicated in a range of psychiatric disorders.

ossicles Three tiny bones -- the malleus, incus and stapes -- that form
a chain in the middle ear, transmitting sound impulses from the ear drum
into the cochlea. parietal Relating to the parietal lobe, the area of
the brain situated above the occipital lobe toward the crown of the
head. Its major function is to process sensory information, particularly
with regard to spatial orientation, but it also has a role in attention
and mathematical ability. parosmia The distortion of the sense of smell.
periaqueductal grey A region of the brainstem that acts as a primary
control centre for the modulation of pain, as well as having a critical
role in a variety of basic functions such as responses to threatening
situations. photoreceptors Specialised nerve cells in the retina that
respond to light, generating electrical impulses when stimulated. The
two major types are rods, specialised to detect low light levels, and
cones, which function at higher light levels but whose pattern of
response allows the perception of colour. primary cortex Refers to a
number of different areas of cerebral cortex that are important for the
conscious awareness of sensory inputs. These include primary visual,
olfactory, auditory and sensory cortices. proprioception The sensory
modality concerned with perceiving the location of the body in space,
and of body parts in relation to each other. It is also referred to as
joint position sense. psychosis The presence of hallucinations that are
thought to be real and/or delusions, implying a weakening of the grasp
of reality. Primarily a feature of psychiatric disease, it can less
frequently be seen in neurological disorders. Riddoch phenomenon The
ability to perceive movement in an area of the field of vision that is
otherwise blind. semicircular canals Three small fluid-filled cavities
that constitute part of the inner ear. They are orientated in three
different axes and detect rotation of the head in all directions.
sensory cortex The area of cerebral cortex whose primary role is the
conscious perception of bodily sensations.

sodium channel The molecular apparatus that underlies the conduction of
electrical impulses throughout the body. These tiny pores in the outer
wall of cells open and close in response to changes in their
environment, such as particular chemicals or changes in electrical
charge. When they open, sodium channels pass through the pores, causing
electrical shifts that can propagate along a cell. spinothalamic tracts
Tracts within the spinal cord that conduct pain and temperature
sensations from the body to the brain. In contrast to the dorsal
columns, they are located in the part of the cord that is closest to the
chest. stapedius A tiny muscle that dampens the movement of the stapes
ossicle, to help protect the ear from loud noises, limiting the
conduction of energy into the cochlea. synapse The small cleft between
nerve cells, where impulses are transmitted through the release and
detection of chemicals termed neurotransmitters. synaesthesia The
joining or merging of senses that are not usually connected. temporal
Relating to the temporal lobe, the major location for neurological
functions such as speech generation and comprehension, visual object
recognition and memory. tinnitus The perception of ringing or buzzing in
the ear in the absence of any sound. It represents a form of auditory
hallucination. trigeminal nerve One of the cranial nerves, its main role
is the conduction of sensory signals from the face and head. Damage or
compression of this nerve may result in severe facial pain, termed
trigeminal neuralgia. Tullio phenomenon The generation of dizziness or
vertigo by sounds. vestibulocochlear nerve The cranial nerve that
conducts signals concerning hearing and balance from the inner ear to
the brain. visual cortex The area of the cerebral cortex primarily
concerned with visual function, it occupies the surface of the occipital
lobe. OceanofPDF.com

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Writers often describe the act of writing as solitary -- just one
person, a blank sheet of paper or a blinking cursor on a computer
screen, filled with white. The only thing between you and an exasperated
publisher waiting for the delivery of a manuscript is your own
procrastination or writer's block. That may be the case in fiction, but
my own experience is incredibly different. I am struck by how many
people have had a hand in this book, by the size of the team that has
brought it to life. The stars of these stories are undoubtedly the
subjects, those brave individuals who agreed to tell me of their
experiences. They are motivated by their hope to alleviate suffering, to
act as pathfinders for others who have similar problems and to increase
understanding about conditions that most people rarely encounter or
think about. These kinds of books that my colleagues and I write are
occasionally accused of being like Victorian freak shows, exhibits of
the curiosities or horrors of medicine, but this totally misses the
point. The telling of these tales serves a greater purpose: to educate,
engender empathy and to provide insights into the broader human
condition. Apart from one or two cases in which names and other details
have been changed to preserve anonymity (and where this happens it is
clearly stated), everything remains totally untouched, including direct
quotations, unless requested by the speaker, or for clarity. I am
enormously grateful to everyone for their active engagement in this
book, but particularly so to those who are, or have been, my patients.
They have trusted me twice over. It is also important to recognise the
work of charities and patient organisations that support individuals out
there suffering from these conditions; large, well-known ones like the
Royal National Institute of Blind People and the Royal National
Institute for the Deaf, but also countless smaller groups, like Esme's
Umbrella for Charles Bonnet

syndrome, the British Tinnitus Association, and Fifth Sense, a charity
supporting people with smell and taste disorders. As with my first book
The Nocturnal Brain, the birth of this book and the radio series for the
BBC World Service and BBC Radio 4 were inextricably linked. And like The
Nocturnal Brain, The Man Who Tasted Words owes a significant debt to
Sally Abrahams, my brilliant producer at BBC Radio Current Affairs, and
to her colleagues Richard Vadon (my executive producer) and Hugh
Levinson. It has been a privilege to work with such clever, creative and
interested people. Within the context of the radio series, and the
experts who gave so much time for background interviews, there are many
people to also thank. There are my colleagues at Guy's and St Thomas'
and at King's College London: Sui Wong, Dominic Ffytche and Louisa
Murdin. Also, from further afield, David Bennett in Oxford, Adam Zeman
in Exeter, Julia Simner in Sussex, Carl Philpott in East Anglia, Thomas
Hummel in Dresden, Matthew Kiernan in Sydney, Jan Schnupp in Hong Kong,
Dana Small at Yale and Donald D. Hoffman at University of California,
Irvine -- all gave generously of their time, and a few also helped find
some of the subjects of this book. Jan Schnupp's excellent book,
Auditory Neuroscience, co-written with Israel Nelken and Andrew King,
was a fantastic reference point for understanding hearing. Donald
Hoffman's book, The Case Against Reality, blew my mind, and I am still
not sure I entirely understand it! It has been a great privilege to
extend my learning into realms that lie beyond the traditional limits of
clinical neurology, and I hope you will all excuse my more basic
understanding of your research and clinical work. I am also grateful to
my colleagues at Guy's and St Thomas', and the NHS hospital trust
itself, who have humoured my somewhat atypical activities in parallel
with my clinical practice. There are so many other people who have also
been fundamental to this book: Luigi Bonomi, my agent in London, without
whom I would never have written a word, and his colleagues George Lucas
at Inkwell and Nicki Kennedy at ILA. My editors Fritha Saunders at Simon
& Schuster in London, and Michael Flamini at St Martin's Press in New
York, whose wisdom has refined these chapters, and who commissioned the
book in the first place.

I am also grateful to several friends, whose kind critiques have proven
enormously helpful. It is always a slightly tentative step, sending out
a bit of yourself into the world to people who you have known for almost
a lifetime, especially in first draft. So, thanks to Jonathan Turner,
Tracey Pettengill Turner and Helen Clarkson, who between them cover all
the bases of literature, history and science. My father, Michael
Leschziner, approached the manuscript with a diligence usually reserved
for peer reviews of scientific articles. I hope he will forgive me for
using incomplete sentences, not befitting the scientific journals!
Finally, I cannot be more grateful to my beautiful family. Ava has kept
me entertained and distracted over this most horrible year of lockdowns,
overflowing hospitals and armchair epidemiology. Maya has brought her
dazzling smile, and has even read some of these chapters, ensuring that
to some extent it is intelligible. And to my wife, Kavita, without whom
none of this would have been possible. She has contributed to every
aspect of this book -- as a sounding board to bounce ideas off and a
fountain of creativity when I have hit a brick wall, passing no comment
when I crept off for an hour or two to write. She has been my absolute
foundation, for the last year and the preceding twenty-four. I am a
lucky man, indeed. OceanofPDF.com

FURTHER READING

Much of the science behind the cases in this book can be found in
standard textbooks on neuroscience and clinical neurology. There are
countless examples, but these are a few of the staples from my shelves:
Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., Jessell, T. M., Siegelbaum, S. A.,
Hudspeth, A. J. (eds), Principles of Neural Science (5th edition,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2012). Patten, J., Neurological Differential
Diagnosis (2nd Edition, Springer, 1998). Clarke, C., Howard, R., Rossor,
M. and Shorvon, S. (eds), Neurology: A Queen Square Textbook
(Wiley-Blackwell, 2009). Brazis, P. W., Masdeu, J. C., Biller, J.,
Localization in Clinical Neurology (5th edition, Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins, 2007). For more specialised reading, I have included further
references below. Vision Cowey, A., 'The blindsight saga', Experimental
Brain Research, 2010, 200(2): 3--24. Chabanat, E., Jacquin-Courtois, S.,
Have, L., et al., 'Can you guess the colour of this moving object? A
dissociation between colour and motion in blindsight', Neuropsychologia,
2019, 128: 204--208. Ajina, S., Bridge, H., 'Blindsight and unconscious
vision: what they teach us about the human visual system',
Neuroscientist, 2017, 23(5): 529-- 41.

O'Brien, J., Taylor, J. P., Ballard, C., et al., 'Visual hallucinations
in neurological and ophthalmological disease: pathophysiology and
management', Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 2020,
91(5): 512--19. Ffytche, D. H., 'Visual hallucinations in eye disease',
Current Opinion in Neurology, 2009, 22(1): 28--35. Leroy R., 'The
syndrome of Lilliputian hallucinations', Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 1922, 56: 325--33. Teufel, C., Fletcher, P. C., 'Forms of
prediction in the nervous system', Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2020,
21(4): 231--42. Corlett, P. R., Horga, G., Fletcher, P. C., et al.,
'Hallucinations and strong priors', Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2019,
23(2): 114--27. Adcock, J. E., Panayiotopoulos, C. P., 'Occipital lobe
seizures and epilepsies', Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology, 2012,
29(5): 397-- 407. Hearing and Balance Schnupp, J., Nelken, I., King, A.,
Auditory Neuroscience (MIT Press, 2012). Ward, B. K., Carey, J. P.,
Minor, L. B., 'Superior Canal Dehiscence Syndrome: lessons from the
first 20 years', Frontiers in Neurology, 2017, 8: 177. Nakashima, T.,
Pyykko, I., Arroll, M. A., et al., 'MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease', Nature Reviews:
Disease Primers, 2016, 2: 1--18. Baloh, R. W., 'Prosper MÃ©niÃ¨re and his
disease', Archives of Neurology, 2001, 58(7): 1151--6. Coebergh, J. A.
F., Lauw, R. F., Sommer, I. E. C., Blom, J. D. 'Musical hallucinations
and their relation with epilepsy', Journal of Neurology, 2019, 266(6):
1501--15. Coebergh, J. A. F., Lauw, R. F., Bots, R., et al., 'Musical
hallucinations: review of treatment effects', Frontiers in Psychology,
2015, 6: 814. Baguley, D., McFerran, D., Hall, D., 'Tinnitus', Lancet,
2013, 382(9904): 1600--07.

Slade, K., Plack, C. J., Nuttall, H. E., 'The effects of age-related
hearing loss on the brain and cognitive function', Trends in
Neuroscience, 2020, 43(10): 810--21. Eckert, M. A., Harris, K. C., Lang,
H., et al., 'Translational and interdisciplinary insights into
presbyacusis: a multidimensional disease', Hearing Research, 2021, 402:
108--109. Corlett, P. R., Honey, G. D., Pletcher, P. D., 'Prediction
error, ketamine and psychosis: an updated model', Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 2016, 30(11): 1145--55. Touch Beecher, H. K., 'Pain
in men wounded in battle', Annals of Surgery, 1946, 123(1): 96--105.
Linden, D. J., Touch: The Science of the Sense That Makes Us Human
(Penguin, 2015). Tang, Z., Chen, Z., Tang, B., Jiang, H., 'Primary
erythromelalgia: a review', Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases, 2015, 10:
127. Bennett, D. L. H., Woods, C. G., 'Painful and painless
channelopathies', Lancet: Neurology, 2014, 13(6): 587--99. Dib-Hajj, S.
D., Waxman, S. G., 'Sodium channels in human pain disorders: genetics
and pharmacogenomics', Annual Review of Neuroscience, 2019, 42: 87--106.
Isbister, G. K., Kiernan, M. C., 'Neurotoxic marine poisoning', Lancet:
Neurology, 2005, 4(4): 219--28. Friedman, M. A., Fleming, L. E.,
Fernandez, M., et al., 'Ciguatera fish poisoning: treatment, prevention
and management', Marine Drugs, 2008, 6(3): 456--79. Shah, S., Vazquez do
Campo, R., Kumar, N., et al., 'Paraneoplastic myeloneuropathies:
clinical, oncologic, and serologic accompaniments', Neurology, 2021,
96(4): e632--9. Peirs, C., Seal, R. P., 'Neural circuits for pain:
recent advances and current views', Science, 2016, 354(6312): 578--84.
Besson, J. M., 'The neurobiology of pain', Lancet, 1999, 353(9164):
1610-- 15.

Damien, J., Colloca, L., Bellei-Rodriguez, C.-E., Marchand, S., 'Pain
modulation: from conditioned pain modulation to placebo and nocebo
effects in experimental and clinical pain', International Review of
Neurobiology, 2018, 139: 255--96. Silas Weir Marshall. 'The case of
George Dedlow', Atlantic Monthly, July 1866, pp.1--10. Taste and Smell
de Araujo, I. E., Schatzker, M., Small, D. M., 'Rethinking food reward',
Annual Review of Psychology, 2020, 71: 139--64. Blankenship, M. L.,
Grigorova, M., Katz, D. B., Maier, J. X., 'Retronasal odor perception
requires taste cortex, but orthonasal does not', Current Biology, 2019,
29(1): 62--9. Small, D. M., 'Flavor is in the brain', Physiology and
Behavior, 2012, 107(4): 540--52. Daniels, J. K., Vermetten, E.,
'Odor-induced recall of emotional memories in PTSD -- review and new
paradigm for research', Experimental Neurology, 2016, 284(Pt B):
168--80. DeVere, R., 'Disorders of Taste and Smell', Continuum, 2017,
23(2): 421-- 46. Calvi, E., Quassolo, U., Massaia, M., et al., 'The
scent of emotions: a systematic review of human intra- and interspecific
chemical communication of emotions', Brain and Behavior, 2020, 10(5):
e01585. Genva, M., Kemene, T., K., Deleu, M., et al., 'Is it possible to
predict the odor of a molecule on the basis of its structure?',
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 2019, 20(12): 3018. Roper,
S. D., Chaudhari, N., 'Taste buds: cells, signals and synapses', Nature
Reviews: Neuroscience, 2017, 18(8): 485--97. Kinnamon, S., Finger, T.
E., 'Recent advances in taste transduction and signaling', F1000
Research, 2019, 8: 2117. LÃ¼bke, K. T., Pause, B. M., 'Always follow your
nose: the functional significance of social chemosignals in human
reproduction and survival', Hormones and Behavior, 2015: 134--44.

Dibattista, M., Pifferi, S., Menini, A., Reisert, J., 'Alzheimer's
disease: what can we learn from the peripheral olfactory system?',
Neuroscience, 2020, 14: 440. Glezer, A., Bruni-Cardoso, A., Schechtman,
D., Malnic, B., 'Viral infection and smell loss: the case of Covid-19',
Journal of Neurochemistry, 2020, 157(4): 930--43. Wang, F., Wu, X., Gao,
J., et al., 'The relationship of olfactory function and clinical traits
in major depressive disorder', Behavioral Brain Research, 2020, 386:
112594. Rochet, M., El-Hage, W., Richa, S., et al., 'Depression,
olfaction, and quality of life: a mutual relationship', Brain Sciences,
2018, 8(5): 80. Brennan, P. A., '50 years of decoding olfaction', Brain
and Neuroscience Advances, 2018, 2: 2398212818817496. Synaesthesia,
Aphantasia and Broader Perception Hoffman, D. D., The Case Against
Reality: Why Evolution Hid the Truth from our Eyes (Allen Lane, 2019).
Simner, J., 'Defining synaesthesia', British Journal of Psychology,
2012, 103(1): 1--15. Neckar, M., Bob, P., 'Neuroscience of synesthesia
and cross-modal associations', Reviews in the Neurosciences, 2014,
25(6): 833--40. Jewanski, J., Simner, J., Day, S. A., Rothen, N., Ward,
J., 'The evolution of the concept of synesthesia in the nineteenth
century as revealed through the history of its name', Journal of the
History of the Neurosciences, 2020, 29(3): 259--85. Fulford, J., Milton,
F., Salas, D., et al., 'The neural correlates of visual imagery
vividness -- an fMRI study and literature review', Cortex, 2018, 105:
26--40. Zeman, A., Milton, F., Della Sala, S., et al., 'Phantasia -- the
psychological significance of lifelong visual imagery vividness
extremes', Cortex, 2020, 130: 426--40. Zeman, A., Dewar, M., Della Sala,
S., 'Lives without imagery -- congenital aphantasia', Cortex, 2015, 73:
378--80.

Zeman, A., Della Sala, S., Torrens, L. A., et al., 'Loss of imagery
phenomenology with intact visuo-spatial task performance: a case of
"blind imagination"', Neuropsychologia, 2010, 48(1): 145--55.
OceanofPDF.com

INDEX

The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not
match the pages in your e-book. Please use the search function on your
e-reading device to search for terms of interest. For your reference,
the terms that appear in the print index are listed below. Abdul
(multiple sclerosis) Aberdeen University Abi (loss of smell)
acetylcholine Adams, Douglas: The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy
adenoids affective component Alison (ciguatera poisoning) Alzheimer's
disease Amanda (congenital insensitivity to pain) ambiguity of sensory
information amoebae amygdala analgesia androstenone aneurysm anosmia
(inability to smell) anterior cingulate cortex antibiotics antibodies
aphantasia (visual memory loss) Aristotle attention, perception of
senses and auditory hallucination Auditory Neuroscience (Nelken/Schnupp)
aura autism autoimmune disease Axel, Richard balance

benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) and cerebellum and hearing
and, labyrinthitis and MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease and proprioception failure and
superior canal dehiscence syndrome and vestibulocochlear nerve and
bandwidth problem (quantity of information too vast for nervous system
to process) basilar membrane Beecher, Lieutenant Colonel Henry K.: 'Pain
in men wounded in battle' Bell's palsy benign paroxysmal positional
vertigo (BPPV) beta-amyloid betahistine bipolar disorder Blake, William:
The Marriage of Heaven and Hell blindsight blind spots Bob (father of
Paul - CIP) bone hyperacusis Bonnet, Charles 'bottom-up' and 'top-down'
processing brain ambiguity of sensory information and bandwidth problem
and hearing and see hearing pain and see pain perception and reality,
discordance between and perception delay and as prediction machine smell
and see smell synaesthesia and taste and see taste touch and see touch
as 'user interface' vision and see vision See also individual area of
the brain brainstem Brexit Brown-SÃ©quard syndrome brussels sprouts and
broccoli, hatred of Buck, Linda Buddhism cancer colorectal lung

phytochemicals, anti-cancer proprioception failure and taste and risk
of, genetic factors influencing tumours see tumours cannabinoids
capsaicin cerebellum Charcot, Jean-Martin Charles Bonnet syndrome
chemosignals chemotherapy Christine (mother of Paul - CIP) ciguatera
poisoning cochlea ageing and basilar membrane and betahistine and
endolymph and function of gain of hearing and hair cells in location of
MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease and ossicles and stapedius and temporal bone and
colorectal cancer colour blindness congenital insensitivity to pain
(CIP) cornea corneal grafts cortical blindness Covid-19
anti-vaxxers/anti-scientists and dogs trained to detect modern medicine
fallibility and smell and cranial nerves cribriform plate cross-talk (of
circuits and pathways) cutaneous rabbit Dawn seizures trigeminal
neuralgia vision loss deafferentation theory delay, perception

delusions dementia Dennis (dementia) depression Descartes, RenÃ© diabetes
dissociated sensory loss DNA doll's eye reflex dorsal column double
vision dreams eardrum electromagnetic radiation emotional pain Empire
Hospital, London enantiomeric compounds encephalitis lethargica
endogenous opioids endolymph endolymphatic hydrops entorhinal cortex
epilepsy aura and cerebral cortex and death and drugs elementary visual
hallucinations genetic causes of insomnia and Laura and MÃ©niÃ¨re's
disease and parietal cortex photosensitive epilepsy St Thomas' Hospital
clinic Susan and triggers 'what' and 'where' pathways of vision and
Escher, M. C. Eustachian tube dysfunction evolution bandwidth problem
and electromagnetic radiation and flavour and hearing and pain and smell
and

synaesthesia and taste and vision and eye, false external senses facial
nerve failure of body fear conditioning field of vision aura and autism
and blind spots blindsight centre of fovea and hearing and
photosensitive epilepsy and Riddoch phenomenon and stroke and tests
First World War (1914) flash-lag illusion flavour Abi (loss of smell)
and components of evolution and illusion of Irene (loss of taste) and
jelly-bean test and memory and mouth-feel and synaesthesia taste and
food history, family fovea frequencies, sound functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) gabapentin Galton, Francis gate-control theory
genetics age-related hearing loss and benign tumours and
colour-blindness and congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP) and DNA
epilepsy and MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease and

multiple sclerosis and olfactory receptor genes primary erythromelalgia
(PE) SCN9A smell and synaesthesia and taste and Geneva, Republic of
glossopharyngeal nerve grommet gustatory nucleus Guy's Hospital, London
Bridge hallucination auditory Charles Bonnet syndrome delusion and
dreams and elementary visual/photosensitive epilepsy and McGurk effect
musical nitrous oxide and perception as controlled phantom-limb
predictive nature of brain and psychosis and tinnitus and see also
tinnitus touch harmonics health and illness, arbitrary nature of hearing
adenoids auditory hallucinations balance and basilar membrane Bell's
palsy benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) Bill Oddie and bone
hyperacusis cochlea, see also cochlea depression, decreased
socialisation and reduced communication, hearing loss and dementia and
eardrum endolymph endolymphatic hydrops environment, perception of sound
Eustachian tube dysfunction frequency and grommets

harmonics hearing aids inner ear, see also inner ear intra-tympanic
steroid injection (passing a hypodermic needle through the eardrum)
Kelly (MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease) labyrinthitis location of a sound source,
understanding Mark (superior canal dehiscence syndrome) McGurk effect
MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease middle ear musical hallucinations nature of an object
and sound it makes Organ of Corti ossicles outer hair cells oval window
pinna (outer ear) presbyacusis (age-related hearing loss) prestin
process of hearing resonant frequency semicircular canals, inner ear
stapedius stapes superior canal dehiscence syndrome (SCDS) synaesthesia
temporal bone tinnitus transmission of sound into the depths of the body
Tullio phenomenon Tumarkin otolithic crises Valsalva manoeuvre
vestibulocochlear nerve and volume and hippocampus HIV Hoffman, Donald
D. homunculus horizontal cells hyposmia (reduced smell) iatrogenic
communication (communicationis iatrogenica imperfecta) ibuprofen
idiopathic intracranial hypertension illusion black and blue dress
internet meme flavour and

hallucination and modern medicine and phantom limb phone vibrating in
pocket prediction and primary erythromelalgia (PE) reality as rubber
hand illusion smell and taste tendon hammer and of touch visual immune
system antibodies and autoimmune disease cancer and corneal grafts and
multiple sclerosis and odour-induced positive-emotion memories and
pernicious anaemia proprioception and smell and immunoglobulin Imperial
Academy of Medicine, Paris Imperial Institute for Deaf-Mutes, Paris
incidentalomas infectious hypothesis inflammation Bell's
palsy/inflammation of the facial nerve central nervous system chronic
uveitis and Irene and labyrinthitis and MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease and multiple
sclerosis and nasal passages Nina and odour-induced positive-emotion
memories and Rahel and smell and spinal cord taste and inner ear balance
and BPPV and cochlea and see cochlea endolymph and

labyrinthitis and MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease and semicircular canals superior
canal dehiscence syndrome and tinnitus and vestibulocochlear nerve
insomnia insula 'internal' senses intra-tympanic steroid injection Irene
(loss of taste) iron lung irritable bowel syndrome James (synaesthete)
jelly-bean test Joanne (parosmia) Jones, Camisha L.: 'Ode to My Hearing
Aids' Kant, Immanuel Keller, Helen: The Story of My Life The World I
Live In Kelly (MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease) ketamine ketorolac Kiernan, Matthew
Kristallnacht (1938) Laboratory of Experimental Physiology, Bologna
labyrinthitis Laennec, RenÃ© language pain and smell and taste and
synaesthesia and touch and lateral line, fish Laura (epilepsy) leprosy
Lhermitte's phenomenon lidocaine patches Lilliputian figures limbic
system loss, sense of LSD Lullin, Charles lumbar puncture

lung cancer macular degeneration major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
Manchester Mark (superior canal dehiscence syndrome) Marshall, Silas
Weir Martin (husband of Dawn) Matrix, The McCall Smith, Alexander
Explosive Adventures McGurk effect medicine, fallibility of modern
memory aphantasia and autobiographical cingulate cortex and earliest
entorhinal cortex and false hippocampus inaccurate or incomplete limbic
system and long-term pain and parietal lobe and short-term smell spatial
synaesthesia and taste and visual MÃ©niÃ¨re, Prosper MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease
meningioma menthol/eucalyptol Mesmer, Franz mesmerism middle ear middle
temporal motion complex migraine mind-body problem mindfulness-based
therapy miraculin Miriam (primary erythromelalgia, or PE) modality,
fifth primary taste Moorfields Eye Hospital morphine motor cortex

motor neurones motor neurone disease mouth-feel MRI scans multiple
sclerosis (MS) muscle spindle receptor musical hallucinations MX
(aphantasia) myelin Nabokov, Vladimir: Lolita Mary naloxone nasal cavity
cross-section of nasal mucosa Nature Nav1.7 sodium channel nerve
conduction studies nervous system ambiguity of sensory information and
bandwidth problem and cross-talk hearing and see hearing inflammation in
limitations of opioids, naturally produced and pain and see pain
perception delay and proprioception and smell and see smell sodium
channel and see sodium channel taste and see taste touch and see touch
vision and see vision See also individual disease/condition neurones
cerebral cortex and Charles Bonnet syndrome and deafferentation theory
and defined disturbance of normal function migraine and motor neurones
myelin sheath nuclei olfactory

perception delay and reality perception and sodium channels and Nina
(Charles Bonnet syndrome) nitrous oxide nocebo response nociceptive
(pain sensation) Nocturnal Brain, The (Leschziner) occipital lobes aura
and parietal and photosensitive epilepsy and Riddoch phenomenon and
visual cortex and 'what' and 'where' pathways of vision and Oddie, Bill
olfactory epithelium olfactory groove olfactory nerves olfactory
receptors Oliver (Riddoch phenomenon) opioids optic chiasm optic disc
optic nerves oral mucosa orbitofrontal cortex Organ of Corti
orthonasally, smelling Orwell, George; Nineteen Eighty-Four ossicles
outer hair cells oval window pain acute intense stress, analgesic effect
of 'affective' component of analgesia and anterior cingulate cortex and
Beecher: 'Pain in men wounded in battle' Brown-SÃ©quard syndrome and
congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP) emotional component of endogenous
opioids gate-control theory human experience, intrinsic to limbic system
and

nocebo response and nociceptive (pain sensation) pain asymbolia pain
matrix Paul (congenital insensitivity to pain) (CIP) periaqueductal grey
(PAG) placebo response and pleasure and positive/negative expectation of
sensory cortex and 'sensory-discriminative' component sodium channel and
spinal cord and spinothalamic tracts state of mind and experience of
synaesthetes and parietal lobe/parietal cortex Parkinson's disease
parosmia Pasteur, Louis Paul (congenital insensitivity to pain) (CIP)
Penfield, Wilder PenFriend perception ambiguity of sensory information
and attention and bandwidth problem and controlled hallucination, as a
delay in pain see pain prediction and reality and, discordance between
smell see smell sound see hearing taste see taste vision see vision
periaqueductal grey (PAG) peripheral nerves peripheral vision pernicious
anaemia phantom limb phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) pheromones photoreceptors
photosensitive epilepsy pinna (outer ear) pituitary gland placebo
response

plasticity post-traumatic stress disorder prediction, brain and
presbyacusis (age-related hearing loss) prestin primary erythromelalgia
(PE) primary sensory cortex primary somatosensory cortex primary visual
cortex ('V1') proprioception Proust, Marcel psilocybin psychosis Rahel
(proprioception failure) rankings, sensory reality, perception of
delusion and see delusion hallucination and see hallucination Hoffman's
theory of brain development and illusion and see illusion perception and
reality, discordance between product of body/construct of brain, as
psychosis and see psychosis regaining senses resonant frequency retina
act of seeing and blind spots and colour-blindness and colour-receptors
in detachment of fovea horizontal cells macular degeneration and optic
disc optic nerves and perception delay and photoreceptors retraining
senses retronasal olfaction Riddoch, George Riddoch phenomenon Rob
(pernicious anaemia) Roden, Claudia: The Book of Jewish Food rubber hand
illusion Rutherford, Ernest

Sacks, Oliver; The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat sagittal sulcus
schizophrenia sciatica SCN9A gene Second World War (1939) Selassie,
Haile semicircular canals, inner ear sensory cortex
sensory-discriminative component sensory homunculus sensory overload
sensory pathways Sexton, Anne: 'The Touch' Shaw, George Bernard: Man and
Superman Shem, Samuel: House of God Sheri (aphantasia) Simner, Julia
sixth sense sixth taste (fat receptors) skin sleep small nerve fibres
smell Abi (loss of smell) Alzheimer's and amygdala and anosmia
(inability to smell) communication between species and Covid-19 and
cranial nerves and cribriform plate and depression and enantiomeric
compounds and entorhinal cortex and evolutionary reduction in importance
of olfactory system fear conditioning and gabapentin hyposmia (reduced
smell) Joanne (parosmia) limbic system and loss of major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) and mate selection and memory and
miraculin nasal cavity nasal mucosa

olfactory epithelium olfactory groove olfactory nerves olfactory
receptors orbitofrontal cortex and Parkinson's and parosmia pheromones,
or chemosignals Proust and retraining synaesthesia and Synsepalum
dulcificum (miracle-berry plant) and theophylline and sodium channels
ciguatera poisoning and function of Nav1.7 pain signals and primary
erythromelalgia and sommelier space-time Spanish flu epidemic spinal
cord brainstem and cerebral cortex pathways and creation of dorsal
columns and inflammation in injury MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease and multiple
sclerosis and pain and perception delay and proprioception and sciatica
and signalling cross-over and spinothalamic tracts and vitamin B12
deficiency and spinothalamic tracts stapedius stapes steroids Steven
(congenital insensitivity to pain) (CIP) stress stroke aphantasia and
cerebral cortex damage and parietal lobe

vertigo and vision and St Thomas' Hospital, Westminster subacute
combined degeneration of the cord superior canal dehiscence syndrome
(SCDS) super-taster Susan (photosensitive epilepsy) 'sympathetic' fibres
synaesthesia autism and brain studies of disadvantages of evolution and
frequency estimates genetic studies of music-colour (Valeria) reality,
forms of and rules governing associations types of word-taste (James)
synapses Synsepalum dulcificum (miracle-berry plant) syphilis taste Abi
(loss of smell) and Bell's palsy and Brussels sprouts and broccoli,
hatred of cancer risk and Covid-19 and evolution and family food
histories and five tastes flavour and see also flavour glossopharyngeal
nerve and gustatory nucleus and insula and Irene (loss of taste)
jelly-bean test limbic system and memory and mouth-feel and multiple
sclerosis and oral mucosa phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) retronasal olfaction
sixth taste, potential/fat receptors sommeliers

super-taster synaesthesia and taste buds taste colour-blindness 'taste',
term umami vagus nerve and temperature receptors temporal bone temporal
lobes theophylline thoracic cord tinnitus auditory cortex, increased
sensitivity of and auditory hallucination and Charles Bonnet syndrome
and common nature of defined hearing loss and MÃ©niÃ¨re's disease and
musical hallucination and product of the brain tumour and touch Abdul
(multiple sclerosis) Alison (ciguatera poisoning) attention and
Brown-SÃ©quard syndrome capsaicin and cerebellum and ciguatera poisoning
congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP) and cutaneous rabbit and diabetes
and dissociated sensory loss epilepsy and Laura (epilepsy) leprosy
Lhermitte's phenomenon Miriam (primary erythromelalgia, or PE) motor
cortex and motor neurones and multiple sclerosis muscle spindle receptor
Nav.7 sodium channel and parietal lobe and peripheral nerves pernicious
anaemia

phantom limb primary erythromelalgia (PE) primary sensory cortex primary
somatosensory cortex proprioception failure Rahel (proprioception
failure) Rob (pernicious anaemia) rubber hand illusion sensory
homunculus and sensory pathways to the brain skin small nerve fibres
spinal cord spinothalamic tracts subacute combined degeneration of the
cord 'sympathetic' fibres taste and temperature receptors too much
sensation trigeminal nerve trigeminal neuralgia trigeminal nerve
trigeminal neuralgia Trump, Donald tuberculosis Tullio phenomenon
Tullio, Professor Pietro Tumarkin otolithic crises tumours 'benign'
cerebral cortex and chemotherapy and epileptic seizures and hearing and
immune system and meningioma smell and, trigeminal neuralgia and vision
loss and umami University of Paris US Army user interface uveitis,
chronic vagus nerve Valeria (synaesthesia)

Valsalva manoeuvre vascular surgery vertigo vestibular system
vestibulocochlear nerve Vicky (congenital insensitivity to pain) (CIP)
vision, Alzheimer's disease and ambiguity of sensory information and
aphantasia (visual memory loss) aura and bandwidth problem and blind
spots blindsight bottom-up and top-down processing and Charles Bonnet
syndrome chronic uveitis colour blindness cone-receptors cornea corneal
grafts cortical blindness Dawn (vision loss) deafferentation theory
delusions and double vision epilepsy, photosensitive Escher and false
eye field of vision see also field of vision fovea horizontal cells
iatrogenic communication (communicationis iatrogenica imperfecta) and
macular degeneration middle temporal motion complex migraine nervous
system limitations and occipital lobes Oliver (Riddoch phenomenon) optic
chiasm optic disc optic nerves parietal lobe/parietal cortex perception
delay and peripheral vision photoreceptors photosensitive epilepsy
pituitary gland

prediction machine, brain as and primary visual cortex ('V1') retina
retinal detachment Riddoch phenomenon Sheri (aphantasia) stroke and
Susan (photosensitive epilepsy) temporal lobes and visual cortex visual
hallucinations 'what' and 'where' pathways of vitamins B12 D volume
walking 'what' and 'where' pathways of vision Woodward, Dr Theodore
Wyndham, John: The Day of the Triffids Zeman, Adam OceanofPDF.com

ALSO BY GUY LESCHZINER The Nocturnal Brain OceanofPDF.com

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

DR. GUY LESCHZINER is the author of The Nocturnal Brain, as well as a

professor of neurology and sleep medicine in London. He sees patients
with a range of neurological and sleep disorders, and is actively
involved in research and teaching. He has also presented series on sleep
and neurology for BBC World Service and Radio 4. You can sign up for
email updates here.

OceanofPDF.com

Thank you for buying this St.Â Martin's Press ebook. To receive special
offers, bonus content, and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.

Or visit us online at us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup For email
updates on the author, click here. OceanofPDF.com

First published in the United States by St.Â Martin's Press, an imprint
of St.Â Martin's Publishing Group THE MAN WHO TASTED WORDS. Copyright Â©
2022 by Guy Leschziner. All rights reserved. Printed in the United
States of America. For information, address St.Â Martin's Publishing
Group, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271. www.stmartins.com Images here,
here, here, here, here Â© Jill Tytherleigh Images here (top) Granger
Historical Picture Archive / Alamy Stock Photo; (bottom) M.C. Escher's
"Ascending and Descending" Â© 2021 The M.C. Escher Company -- The
Netherlands. All rights reserved. www.mcescher.com Our ebooks may be
purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please
contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at
1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by email at
MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com. Originally published in Great
Britain by Simon & Schuster UK Ltd First U.S. Edition: 2022

OceanofPDF.com

CONTENTS

Title Page Copyright Notice Dedication Introduction 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

The Stuff of Superheroes Zombie Faces The Stench of a Rose All the Nice
Girls Love a Sailor In the Kingdom of the Blind Coffee and Cardamom On
the Merry-Go-Round The Burning Tracks of My Tears The Pain of Sheer
Happiness Epilogue: The Truth About the Truth Glossary of Terms
Acknowledgments Further Reading Index Also by Guy Leschziner About the
Author Copyright

OceanofPDF.com


