The Neuroscience of Psychotherapy Second Edition OceanofPDF.com

The Neuroscience of Psychotherapy Healing the Social Brain • Second
Edition •

Louis Cozolino Foreword by Daniel J. Siegel

W. W Norton & Company New York • London OceanofPDF.com

Unless otherwise noted, figures were created by the author. Copyright ©
2010, 2002 by Louis J. Cozolino All rights reserved For information
about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to:
Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY
10110 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Cozolino, Louis
J. The neuroscience of psychotherapy: healing the social brain / Louis
J. Cozolino.---2nd ed. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references. ISBN
978-0-393-70642-0 (hardcover) 1. Psychotherapy. 2. Neurosciences. 3.
Brain---Research. I. Title. RC480.5.C645 2010 616.89'14---dc22
2009043708 ISBN: 978-0-393-70657-4 W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500
Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110 www.wwnorton.com W. W. Norton &
Company Ltd., Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London W1T 3QT
OceanofPDF.com

This book is dedicated to my family: my mother's courage, my father's
determination, and the memory of my grandparents. Together they somehow
instilled within me the belief that all things are possible.
OceanofPDF.com

Contents

Foreword Preface to the Second Edition Part I. Neuroscience and
Psychotherapy: An Overview 1. The Entangled Histories of Neurology and
Psychology 2. Building and Rebuilding the Brain: Psychotherapy and
Neuroscience 3. Neural Integration in Different Models of Psychotherapy
Part II. How the Brain Works: The Legacy of Evolution 4. The Human
Nervous System: From Neurons to Neural Networks 5. Multiple Memory
Systems in Psychotherapy 6. Laterality: One Brain or Two? Part III. The
Organization of Experience and the Healthy Brain 7. The Executive Brain
8. Consciousness and Reality 9. From Neural Networks to Narratives: The
Quest for Multilevel Integration Part IV. The Social Brain 10. The
Social Brain

11. Building the Social Brain: Shaping Attachment Schemas 12. The
Neurobiology of Attachment Part V. The Disorganization of Experience 13.
The Anxious and Fearful Brain 14. Trauma and Neural Network Dissociation
15. The Self in Exile: Narcissism and Pathological Caretaking Part VI.
The Reorganization of Experience 16. The Evolutionary Necessity of
Psychotherapy 17. Teaching Old Dogs New Tricks: Stimulating Neural
Plasticity 18. The Psychotherapist as Neuroscientist Credits References
OceanofPDF.com

Foreword

Louis Cozolino's contributions to the Norton Series on Interpersonal
Neurobiology have been instrumental in moving this new interdisciplinary
field forward. The first edition of The Neuroscience of Psychotherapy
inaugurated the series, which now includes 16 titles. With this second
edition, Lou has extended and deepened interpersonal neurobiology's
basic view that integration is at the heart of well-being. I loved the
first edition and have learned a tremendous amount from reading this
exciting and extremely accessible updated edition. Readers new to
interpersonal neurobiology (IN) will find this a wonderful place to
start their journey, as Lou deftly brings the latest in cutting-edge
science together with the healing art of psychotherapy. Those familiar
with the field will find this a welcome addition to their IN library of
texts written with the clinician in mind. As the founding editor of the
IN series, I have been proud to oversee the publication of these books
that explore various dimensions of psychotherapy and science. Though
each of the individual authors of and contributors may not articulate
their work with the same vocabulary, their contributions have all added
to the research and clinical synthesis that forms an educational
foundation for IN as a multidisciplinary and synthetic way of knowing
about what it means to be human. Ours is a complex species: We have
inherited a nervous system whose evolution has left us with many
mechanisms not suited to modern life. And we live within relationships
that have shaped and continue to shape how our social brains are
constructed within families, communities, and society. Cultural
evolution continues to mold our synaptic architecture, influencing how
we experience our inner, subjective lives and learn to communicate with
one another. This complexity could easily make us as clinicians move
away from science to approach healing from an intuitive way of knowing
alone. My hope in founding the field of IN has been that we would be
able to see the

forest for the trees, so to speak, and not get distracted by details,
with all of their fascinating and nuanced complexities, but rather
become enriched by all of this cutting-edge unfolding of new knowledge
and ideas. But, this certainly is a challenge. In the busy lives of
clinicians (and just plain everyday life), the tremendous amounts of
data emerging from everexpanding fields of science can be daunting. What
we are trying to do with the IN series is to provide a forum for those
working at the creative boundary between the chaos of overwhelming
knowledge and the order of an intellectual framework. Lou Cozolino rides
that edge like a master surfer, bringing together emerging findings from
neuroscience with the beauty and power of healing relationships. It's a
magnificent adventure, and you will need to take a deep breath and hold
on as he takes you along with him through the various dimensions of
science to see psychotherapy from new and helpful vantage points. A
framework that can be helpful in this important quest views clinical
work as involving a triangle of well-being comprising the three points
of Mind, Brain, and Relationships. This is a visual metaphor depicting
the most foundational dimensions of our human lives, the essence of our
subjective and our objective lives. This is a triangle revealing the
flow of energy and information. Relationships are how we share energy
and information with one another. The brain is here the extended nervous
system distributed throughout the entire body, which is a mechanism
through which energy and information flows. And the mind, in part, is
how that flow is regulated---how we see and shape energy and information
as it moves through our bodies and through our relationships.
Psychotherapy entails shaping these elements of our triangle toward
well-being. From the IN perspective, health is achieved by promoting
integration in our lives: Our minds come to monitor and modify our
internal and interpersonal worlds toward the linkage of differentiated
elements. The mind is a process that is both embodied and relational. In
this view we can use our minds to cultivate integration, which promotes
harmony; the lack of integration leads to chaos or rigidity. From the IN
standpoint, we can see, for example, the various psychiatric symptoms
and syndromes as revealing the chaos and rigidity that emerge from
impairments to integration. Clinical assessment can detect when chaos
and rigidity are present and identify the neural or interpersonal
domains in which integration is lacking. Focusing on the need to enhance
differentiation and promote linkage, an IN clinician is

offered the framework with which to evaluate, so he or she can then
create a treatment plan based on the centrality of integration in the
cultivation of well-being. Beyond just eliminating symptoms, this view
defines health and offers practical steps to promote the integration at
the heart of living a harmonious, creative, and meaningful life.
Providing us with a rich and varied tapestry that weaves up-to-date
science with his decades of fabulous work as a clinician and master
educator in the field of mental health, Professor Cozolino is our guide
in this eye-opening exploration of integration and the pathway toward
health. Both our patients' and our own lives can greatly benefit from
this fruitful journey of discovery. Welcome to the world of integration
and interdisciplinary thinking! Daniel J. Siegel, MD Founding Editor,
The Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology OceanofPDF.com

Preface to the Second Edition

It has been extremely gratifying to witness the first edition of The
Neuroscience of Psychotherapy play a role in introducing a new
generation of therapists to the complex and fascinating world of the
brain. Over the years, this book has created many opportunities for me
to interact with students, teachers, and therapists who are curious
about the biological basis of human behavior. Their enthusiastic
feedback has strengthened my belief in the relevance of neuroscience to
clinical practice and my dedication to the integration of mind and
brain. There are a number of reasons for this new edition. The first is
that I've discovered the truth of the saying "writing is the process of
rewriting what you have already rewritten," an urge that, for me, didn't
diminish with the publication of the first edition. Second, the energy
and enthusiasm generated by neuroscience in the 1990s has continued to
build momentum and bear fruit. New technologies have broadened our
window to neural functioning; empirical discoveries have led us into new
areas of exploration; and increasingly sophisticated theories have
fueled our imaginations. Finally, the findings relevant to psychotherapy
and mental health from all this new research continued to accrue and
called out to be included in The Neuroscience of Psychotherapy. This
second edition contains a few new chapters that focus on attachment,
epigenetics, and the construction of consciousness. There is also a
discussion of some of the evolutionary shortcomings of the human brain
that make us so susceptible to psychological distress. You will notice
that this second edition embodies a shift in perspective toward social
neuroscience, and the recognition that the human brain is a social
organ. Reflecting this shift is the change in the book's subtitle from
Building and Rebuilding the Human Brain to Healing the Social Brain:
Less mechanistic

and grandiose perhaps, and also more human. I hope you enjoy the fruits
of this labor of love. I want to thank Lauren Harb, Tehniat Mirza,
Vanessa Streiff, Denise Duval, and Nazanin Moali for their assistance in
the preparation of this manuscript. Thanks also to Andrea Costella and
Deborah Malmud for being highly competent and compassionate rocks at the
center of the storm. And finally, thanks to my family, friends, clients,
students, and colleagues for their caring, support, energy, and love.
Louis Cozolino Los Angeles, September 2009 OceanofPDF.com

The Neuroscience of Psychotherapy Second Edition OceanofPDF.com

PART I.

Neuroscience and Psychotherapy: An Overview

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 1

The Entangled Histories of Neurology and Psychology We must recollect
that all of our provisional ideas in psychology will presumably one day
be based on an organic substructure. ---Sigmund Freud How does the brain
give rise to the mind? Where do the brain and mind meet, and by what
means do they interact with one another? These are difficult
questions---so difficult, in fact, that the common reaction is to focus
on either the mind or the brain and act as if the other is irrelevant
(Blass & Carmeli, 2007; Pulver, 2003). The problem with this approach is
the barrier it creates to understanding that the human experience of
brain and mind is essentially a unified process (Cobb, 1944). Neurology
and psychology are simultaneously pushed apart by academic and
intellectual politics while being drawn together by their common
psychobiological foundation. The entangled histories of neurology and
psychology reflect the push and pull of these powerful opposing forces
(Ellenberger, 1970; Sulloway, 1979). Freud started out as a rebel, a
neurologist curious about the mind. I suspect he was frustrated with the
mind--brain partisanship of medical school, and longed to work with
others who shared his interests. At the age of 29, Freud won a traveling
fellowship to spend the fall and winter of 1885 at the Salpêtrière
Hospital on the left bank of Paris. The choice of the Salpêtrière was
based on the reputation of Professor Jean-Martin Charcot, a man
considered an expert on both mind and brain. In Charcot, Freud sought a
teacher who was well established, confident, and unafraid of the
noman's-land between mind and brain. One can imagine Freud's excitement
as he walked the streets of Paris on his way to meet the great man, a
possible kindred spirit.

Charcot specialized in patients suffering from what was then called
hysteria. These patients had symptoms, such as seizures or paralysis,
that mimicked neurological illnesses but were without apparent physical
cause. A classic example is a condition called glove anesthesia, in
which feeling is lost in one or both hands beginning at the wrist. In
these patients, the hands appear to take on symbolic significance;
perhaps they have been used to commit some taboo act that triggered
overwhelming guilt or fear. It was believed that a conflict within the
mind was converted into a bodily symptom. The 1880s were also a time
when the ability of the subconscious mind to control behavior (as
demonstrated through hypnosis) burst into popular awareness. Charcot
used hypnosis during clinical demonstrations to illustrate his emerging
theories about mind--body interactions. The months Freud spent at
Salpêtrière with Charcot had a profound effect on him. He came to
believe that hidden mental processes do indeed exert powerful effects on
consciousness, and that hysterical symptoms result not from malingering
or feigning illness, but from the power of the unconscious mind embedded
within the neural structures of the brain. Hysteria, from this
perspective, reflected the capacity of traumatic experience to
reorganize the brain and disrupt conscious experience. Dissociative
splits between consciousness and behavior demonstrated to Freud that the
brain is capable of multiple levels of conscious and unconscious
awareness. In the decades to come, he would explore the use of language,
emotion, and the therapeutic relationship to reconnect them. Freud
returned to Vienna in February 1886, and opened his own clinical
practice 2 months later. Despite his entry into the medical
establishment, he continued his rebellion later that year with the
presentation of a paper on the existence of hysteria in males. Deeply
fascinated by the unconscious, Freud remained its most ardent explorer
until his death in 1939. In the years following his residency at
Salpêtrière, Freud expanded on Charcot's thinking in many significant
ways. He placed the unconscious in a developmental context by tracing
the genesis of hysterical symptoms to childhood experiences. He came to
believe that hysterical patients suffered from the unconscious emotional
aftereffects of repressed childhood memories. Furthermore, Freud
connected the development of the individual to the evolution of the
species. Influenced by the ancient idea that we contain within us the
biological history of our primitive ancestors, he

included the importance of instinctual drives such as sexuality, rage,
and envy in his developmental theories. Freud believed that beneath our
civilized exteriors, there exists within us a more primitive being,
accounting for many of the contradictions of modern "civilized"
behavior. Freud argued that in order to understand who and what we are,
we need to understand the primal unconscious elements of experience. He
called this the id---the primitive and uncivilized life energy that we
share with our reptilian and mammalian ancestors. This concept was met
with understandable hostility by Freud's repressed and rational
contemporaries. At that time, physicians were pillars of European
culture, highly invested in their superiority over the animal kingdom
and steadfast in their right and obligation to subjugate the "primitive"
people of the world. Needless to say, linking civilized humans to
animals (to say nothing of his idea that children have sexual desires)
made Freud and his theories scandalous in respectable circles. Freud's
Abandoned Project The seemingly irreconcilable dichotomies and paradoxes
that formerly prevailed with respect to mind vs. matter...become
reconciled in a...unifying view of mind, brain, and man in nature.
---Roger Sperry In the late 1800s, the doors to the microscopic world of
the nervous system opened for the first time. Technical improvements in
the microscope and newly developed staining techniques led to the
discovery of both neurons and the synapses through which they
communicate. The existence of synapses revealed that the nervous system
is not a single structure, but instead is made up of countless
individual processing units. Furthermore, that humans shared these
neurons with all other living creatures supported the Darwinian idea of
our common ancestry with other animals. Around this same time, the work
of Wernicke and Broca showed that specific areas of the brain were
responsible for different aspects of language. The dual neuroanatomical
notions of synaptic transmission and the localization of specific
functions to different areas of the brain provided rich theoretical soil
for new ways of understanding the brain.

Inspired by Darwin, Charcot, and the opening of the microscopic neural
world to investigation, Freud wrote The Project for a Scientific
Psychology (Freud, 1968). In The Project, he postulated that what we
witness of conscious and unconscious behavior is organized by and stored
within the brain's neural architecture. As part of this work, he drew
simple sketches of interconnecting neurons to represent human impulses,
behaviors, and psychological defenses. These sketches depicted the
interactions among drives, the organs of the senses, and mechanisms of
inhibition. According to his colleagues, Freud became obsessed with the
idea of constructing a neurobiological model of the mind (Schore,
1997b). Despite his enthusiasm, Freud realized that his dream for
psychology to be based in an understanding of the nervous system was far
ahead of its time, and at odds with prevailing religious beliefs and
medical dogma. For these and other reasons, he suppressed the
publication of The Project until his death. Perhaps Freud kept the
Project to himself because he feared that it would be relegated to the
same sort of obscurity as the case of Phineas Gage. Gage, a 19th-century
railroad foreman, had a metal bar pass completely through his head as a
result of an accident, causing the destruction of the middle portions of
his frontal cortex. This particular area of the brain has since been
shown to be involved with judgment, planning, and emotional control.
Although Gage had no specific motor or language deficits, those who knew
him said that "Gage was no longer Gage" (Benson, 1994). His
emotionality, relationship abilities, and the quality of his experience
were all dramatically altered. Because Gage's symptoms involved his
personality and emotions, the publication reporting his case received
little attention for most of the 20th century. Not only was it outside
the realm of behaviors that neurologists felt comfortable addressing,
but there was also a bias against relating human personality to
neurobiological mechanisms (Damasio, 1994). Freud, the neurologist,
became all but forgotten as his psychological theories moved further and
further from their biological roots. He chose instead to utilize the
more palatable and accessible metaphors of literature and anthropology
to provide the primary vocabulary for psychoanalysis. Unfortunately,
Freud's shift from the brain to metaphors of mind opened psychoanalysis
to all sorts of criticism throughout the 20th century. Metaphors such as
the Oedipal and Electra complexes were seen as contrived fictions,
shielding them from scientific evaluation. Perhaps Freud

anticipated that in the future, psychoanalysis would eventually be
integrated with its neurobiological substrates. This would only happen
when the time was right for a synthesis based in an equal partnership of
both sciences (Pribram & Gill, 1976). The time for such an integration
has arrived, and respect for psychological processes have taken a strong
enough hold within both the scientific community and general culture
that we can avoid a reduction of the mind to basic biochemical
processes. On the contrary, an appreciation for the structures and
functioning of the brain by nonneurologists has become the norm. It is
in this spirit that we turn our attention to ways of thinking about the
brain that enhance our understanding of human experience. We begin with
a model of the brain that provides a bridge between the fields of
neuroscience, evolution, and the origins of the unconscious. The Triune
Brain He who joyfully marches in rank and file...has been given a large
brain by mistake, since for him the spinal cord would suffice. ---Albert
Einstein In the 1970s, the neuroscientist Paul MacLean presented a
theory that emphasized the conservation of more primitive evolutionary
structures within the modern human brain (MacLean, 1990; Taylor, 1999).
MacLean called his idea the triune brain. Very much in line with the
theories of Darwin and Freud, it provides an evolutionary explanation
that may account for some of the contradictions and discontinuities of
human consciousness and behavior. MacLean described the human brain as a
three-part system that embodies our evolutionary connection to both
reptiles and lower mammals. Think of it as a brain within a brain within
a brain, with each successive layer devoted to increasingly complex
functions and abilities. At the core is the reptilian brain, relatively
unchanged through evolutionary history, responsible for activation,
arousal, homeostasis, and reproductive drives. The paleomammalian brain
(or limbic system), which is central to learning, memory, and emotion,
wraps around the reptilian brain. The highest layer,

the neomammalian brain or cerebral cortex, organizes conscious thought,
problem solving, and self-awareness (MacLean, 1985). MacLean suggested
that our three brains don't necessarily communicate or work well
together because of their differing "mentalities" and the fact that only
the neomammalian brain is capable of consciousness and verbal
communication (MacLean, 1990). This is a fundamental issue that connects
evolution, neuroscience, and psychotherapy. What Charcot and Freud
called dissociation and hysteria could well have been the result of
inadequate integration and coordination among these different,
cohabiting brains. MacLean's description of the nonverbal reptilian and
paleomammalian brains unconsciously influencing processing in the
neomammalian brain roughly parallels Freud's distinction of the
conscious and the unconscious minds. The model of the triune brain
serves the valuable function of providing a connective metaphor among
the artifacts of evolution, the contemporary nervous system, and some of
the inherent difficulties in the organization of human experience. This
conservation of our evolutionary history alongside our modern neural
networks confronts the therapist with the challenge of simultaneously
treating a human, a horse, and a crocodile (HampdenTurner, 1981). Ah, If
Only It Were So Simple! The large brain, like large government, may not
be able to do simple things in simple ways. ---Donald Hebb A superficial
reading of MacLean's work might lead us to the idea that each layer of
the triune brain evolved independently and sequentially, and that they
all cooperate in a hierarchical fashion like a military chain of
command. This is clearly not the case. In reality, the reptilian and
paleomammalian brains have continued to evolve alongside the
neomammalian brain. Earlier structures are not conserved "as is" from
past generations, but also undergo a process of exaptation---the
modification of earlier evolving brain structures for new applications
in networks dedicated to alternative or more complex functions (Cacioppo
& Berntson, 2004). Thus, all three layers continue to evolve along with
the emergence of ever

more complex vertical and horizontal neural networks. This conservation
and modification of neural networks has led to an amazingly complex
brain capable of a vast array of functions from monitoring respiration
to performing mathematical computations. This makes understanding
functional neuroanatomy from a study of the contemporary brain quite a
challenge. An example from space exploration may prove useful in
understanding the neuroanatomist's dilemma. When Apollo 13 approached
the moon, difficulties with the air supply system left the crew with
just a few hours of oxygen (Lovell & Kluger, 1994). In the face of this
crisis, scientists on earth removed nonessential components from a mock
spacecraft and constructed a new air supply system. Pieces of
upholstery, plastic bags, duct tape, and electrical wiring were used in
innovative ways to serve new functions. The instructions on how to build
this makeshift device were then conveyed to the Apollo 13 crew. This
scenario is much closer to the crafting of the modern brain than
imagining an engineer sitting down with a blank sheet of paper. An
engineer of the future presented with this bootstrapped air purification
system would have a difficult time figuring out what it is and why it
was built the way it was. Although there are obvious differences between
the Apollo 13 scenario and natural selection, both are examples of a
pragmatic adaptation with existing materials to an environmental crisis.
The multiple roles played by the cerebellum offer a prime example of
both neural conservation and exaptation. The cerebellum is a primitive
brain structure. At its core is the vermis, centrally involved in
balance. In fish, the vermis helps them to swim upright. In humans, it
coordinates vestibular functioning and helps us to sit up and walk
without falling. During evolution, as our brains and bodies became more
complex, the cerebellum expanded to coordinate gross and then fine motor
movements--- a logical development for a structure initially at the core
of the ability to swim. In an interesting and surprising twist, the
later-evolving portions of the cerebellar lobes are involved in the
organization and coordination of language, memory, and reasoning
(Schmahmann, 1997). It appears that the cerebellum's ability to process,
sequence, and organize vast amounts of sensory-motor information was
utilized by the evolving brain as part of the neural infrastructure of
higher cortical processes. Just as balance and motor behavior require
constant monitoring of posture and the inhibition of unnecessary and
distracting movements, so, in

their own ways, do attention, concentration, memory, and language. The
same timing mechanisms involved in locomotion seem to have been
conserved for sequential processing in thought and language. Although
the cerebellum is considered a primitive brain structure, its evolution
involved vertical networking with most of the cortex, suggesting that
the vertical networks that connect the horizontal layers of the triune
brain may serve as clues to its evolutionary history (Alexander, DeLong,
& Strick, 1986; Cummings, 1993). In addition to horizontal and vertical
networks, evolution has also selected for increasing differentiation
between the left and right hemispheres. Certain areas of the brain have
become specialized for specific skills, such as language and spatial
abilities. Still other areas, such as those in the prefrontal cortex,
serve to organize and control the activity of multiple other regions.
Keep in mind that the brains of men and women also have many differences
and that the brain changes as we grow up and grow older (Cozolino,
2008). Many of these differences are especially important to the
processes of attachment and affect regulation so central to
psychotherapy. Neural networks relevant to psychotherapy exist
throughout the brain--- some are evolutionarily primitive, others
developing more recently. Some are fully functional from birth, while
others take decades to mature. This is why an understanding of both
evolution and development is vital in capturing the full picture of
human experience. The Interpersonal Sculpting of the Social Brain It is
difficult to give children a sense of security unless you have it
yourself. If you have it, they catch if from you. ---William Menninger
The theory that ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny refers to the concept
that the evolution of the species is recreated in the gestation and
development of each individual. To use MacLean's terms, we pass through
the reptilian and paleomammalian stages before we develop into a fully
human being. Although the theory of recapitulation is in most ways
incorrect (Gould, 1977), some interesting parallels exist between our
evolutionary history and the process of human development.

At birth, the reptilian brain is fully functional and the paleomammalian
brain is primed and ready to be organized by early experiences. The
cortex, on the other hand, continues to slowly grow into the third
decade and matures throughout life. Thus, much of our most important
emotional and interpersonal learning occurs during our early years when
our primitive brains are in control. The result is that a great deal of
learning takes place before we have the necessary cortical systems for
explicit memory, problem solving, or perspective. Consequently, many of
our most important socioemotional learning experiences are organized and
controlled by reflexes, behaviors, and emotions outside of our awareness
and distorted by our immature brains. To a great extent, psychotherapy
owes its existence to these artifacts of evolution and development. The
slow development of the cerebral cortex maximizes the influence of
experience in building the brain. That so much of the brain is shaped
after birth is both good and bad news. The good news is that the
individual brain is built to survive in a particular environment.
Culture, language, climate, nutrition, and parents shape each of our
brains in a unique way. In good times and with good-enough parents, this
early brain building will serve the child well throughout life. The bad
news comes into play when factors are not so favorable, such as in times
of war or in the case of parental psychopathology or separation (Benes,
Taylor, & Cunningham, 2000). The brain is then sculpted in ways that
assist the child in surviving childhood but may be maladaptive later in
life. It is in these instances that a therapist attempts to restructure
neural architecture in the service of more adaptive behavior, cognition,
and emotion. Building the human brain is vastly complex. Rebuilding it
is a difficult and fascinating challenge. A portion of the brain called
the anterior cingulate---centrally involved with maternal behavior,
nursing, and play---appears in the evolution of early mammals (MacLean,
1985). Before this, animals had to be prepared to survive on their own
at birth. Good examples are newborn sea turtles that hatch from their
eggs high on a beach and make a mad instinctual dash toward the ocean.
With the evolution of maternal care, children are allowed to develop
more slowly within a supportive, scaffolding environment. In the course
of evolution, primates have experienced increasingly longer periods of
maternal dependence. This luxury allows for the evolution and
development of more complex brains, as well as an increasing impact of
parenting and early experiences on how the brain is built.

Konrad Lorenz (1991) found that geese imprint (bond to attachment
figures) during a limited period of time soon after birth. If baby geese
saw Lorenz first, they would follow him as if he were their mother.
Lorenz also found that when these geese reached sexual maturity 2 years
later, they would "fall in love" with the kinds of geese they had been
exposed to during their imprinting period. He even noted that a baby
goose, which originally imprinted on him, fell in love with a human girl
from the next town when he reached sexual maturity and would fly there
to see her. These early experiences seemed to be permanently etched into
the brains of Lorenz's geese. This principle of imprinting can be seen
in humans in the more flexible and complex form of attachment schema.
The early interpersonal environment may be imprinted in the human brain
by shaping the child's neural networks and establishing the biochemical
set points in circuitry dedicated to memory, emotion, safety, and
survival. Later, these structures and processes come to serve as the
infrastructure for social and intellectual skills, affect regulation,
and the sense of self. Prolonged dependence in childhood has allowed for
the development of a neocortex so complex that we have become capable of
spoken and written language, self-consciousness, and the construction of
both private and social selves. Although these abilities create
tremendous possibilities, brainpower does have its downside. We are now
also capable of becoming anxious about things that will never happen,
depressed by imagined slights, and saddened by potential losses. Our
imaginations can simultaneously create exciting new worlds, as well as
the fears that prevent us from living in them. It is obvious that
despite the evolution of consciousness and rationality, our primitive
emotional brains and their early development continue to exert a great
deal of influence over us. Summary Although Freud began his career
attempting to create a brain-based psychology, the theories and
technology available to him did not allow him to carry out this project.
Various ways of thinking about the brain (like MacLean's), although
limited, provide models that bridge the gap between psychology and
neurology. Evolution's legacy is a complex brain, vulnerable to a
variety of factors that can disrupt the growth and integration

of important neural networks. The field of psychotherapy has emerged
because of the brain's vulnerability to these developmental and
environmental risks. But how can psychotherapists synthesize and
incorporate both the mind and the brain into our work? The following
chapter presents a model of neural networks, how they develop, and how
we attempt to alter them during treatment. It is from this perspective
that we will then examine the relevance of the nervous system to our
work. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 2

Building and Rebuilding the Brain: Psychotherapy and Neuroscience I know
of no more encouraging fact than the unquestionable ability of man to
elevate his life by a conscious endeavor. ---Henry David Thoreau
Although psychotherapy originally emerged from neurology, differences in
language and worldview have limited collaboration among the two fields
for most of the 20th century. While psychotherapists developed a rich
metaphoric language of mind, neurologists built a detailed database of
brain--behavior relationships. As we approached the 21st century,
neuroscience began providing us with tools to explore what happens in
the brain during early development, and later in psychotherapy. A return
to Freud's Project of a biological psychology is finally at hand. At the
heart of the interface of neuroscience and psychotherapy is the fact
that human experience is mediated via two interacting processes. The
first is the expression of our evolutionary past via the organization,
development, and functioning of the nervous system---a process resulting
in billions of neurons organizing into neural networks, each with its
own timetable and requirements for growth. The second is the
contemporary shaping of our neural architecture within the context of
relationships. The human brain is a "social organ of adaptation"
stimulated to grow through positive and negative interactions with
others. The quality and nature of our relationships become encoded
within the neural infrastructure of our brains. It is through this
translation of experience into neurobiological structures that nature
and nurture become one. At the heart of psychotherapy is an
understanding of the interwoven forces of nature and nurture, what goes
right and wrong in their

developmental unfolding, and how to reinstate healthy neural
functioning. When one or more neural networks necessary for optimal
functioning remain underdeveloped, underregulated, or underintegrated
with others, we experience the complaints and symptoms for which people
seek therapy. We now assume that when psychotherapy results in symptom
reduction or experiential change, the brain has, in some way, been
altered (Kandel, 1998). How does psychotherapy change the brain? How is
memory stored and how can the quality of experience change? Before we
can address these questions we have to first get an idea of how the
brain is organized and how it performs some of its many functions. We
will discuss the building and rebuilding of neural networks, the role of
enriched environments, and the part played by stress in changing the
brain. We will also explore the central role of the therapeutic
relationship in this change process, as well as the importance of the
expression of emotion and the therapeutic use of language. Neural
Networks A forest of these trees is a spectacle too much for one man to
see. ---David Douglas So far we have used the term neural networks in a
general way; I would like now to get a bit more specific. Neurons are
the microscopic processing units that make up all parts of the nervous
system. When we talk of the frontal cortex, amygdala, or hippocampus, we
are literally talking about large numbers of individual neurons
organized to perform a set of functions. The neurons within these
systems need to be able to organize and reorganize in such a way as to
allow us to learn, remember, and act as we adjust to different
situations. Because each neuron is limited to either firing or not
firing, the diverse capabilities of the nervous system come from the
complex interaction of individual neuronal signals. A simplistic analogy
is an old-fashioned billboard consisting of rows and columns of
thousands of light bulbs. Although each individual bulb is limited to
being either on or off, the pattern created by these lights can spell
out words, form images, and through precise timing, create the illusion
of movement. In a similar

fashion, patterns of neural firing come to represent specific
information within the brain and throughout the nervous system. FIGURE
2.1 The Feedforward Neural Network A depiction of sixteen neurons in a
simple feedforward circuit

To accomplish the complexity required for behavior, neurons organize
into neural networks. A neural network can range from just a few neurons
in a simple animal to trillions of neural interconnections in brains
such as our own. Neural networks encode and organize all of our
behaviors from basic reflexes, such as pulling our hand away from a hot
stove, to our ability to simultaneously comprehend the visual,
emotional, and political

significance of Picasso's Guernica. Neural networks can interconnect
with multiple other networks, allowing for interaction and integration.
Because we will be referring to neural networks throughout the chapters
to come, it is important to keep a good visual image in our minds as we
proceed. FIGURE 2.2 The Feedforward and Feedback Neural Network A
slightly more complex model in which information is fed backwards and
each neuron can communicate with all of its neighbors.

Figures 2.1 and 2.2 depict simple neural networks, with each circle
representing an individual neuron. Starting with Figure 2.1, you will
notice that the flow of information moves from left to right across the
four columns of neurons. On the left, some of the input neurons are
firing in response to some stimulus (1 = firing/0 = nonfiring). In turn,
their firing stimulates the activation of some set of neurons within the
hidden layers of

processing, which leads to the firing of a set of output neurons, which
results in a particular experience or behavioral reaction. Figure 2.2
represents a step toward a more accurate model, with information flowing
in both directions and an increased level of interaction among neurons.
Each of the connections will have either an excitatory or inhibitory
effect on other neurons. This mosaic of firing patterns, the network's
instantiation, will determine which set of output neurons fire. Making
things slightly more complicated, instead of 16 neurons there are
millions, each of which can be connected to thousands of others.
Instantiations are sculpted by experience and encode all of our
abilities, emotions, and experiences into one or more forms of memory.
It is the consistency of these firing patterns that results in organized
patterns of behavior and experience. Once these neural patterns are
established, new learning modifies the relationship of neurons within
these networks. At other times, new learning may occur when we shape one
neural network to inhibit the activation of another. When we talk of
building and rebuilding the brain, neurons are our basic building blocks
and neural networks are the structures that we build and sculpt.
Learning within neural networks occurs as a result of trial and error.
Feed-forward and feedback information loops form complex patterns of
excitation and inhibition among neurons within the hidden layers. This
process eventually leads to consistent and adaptive output. This is
demonstrated in a soon-to-be toddler, who repeatedly tests and refines
her balance, leg strength, and coordination with each new attempt to
walk. Her brain drives her to keep trying while recording her successes
and failures within neural networks responsible for balance, motor
coordination, and visual tracking. In this same way, neural networks
organize behaviors, emotions, thoughts, and sensations that are shaped
throughout life. I remember being surprised to find a table of random
numbers in an appendix of my college statistics textbook. At first, I
thought this to be a waste of paper, assuming that anyone could generate
random numbers on their own. When I shared my thoughts with the
professor, he assured me that much research had gone into demonstrating
that we are incapable of generating random numbers. He said that as hard
as we might try, we cannot avoid generating specific patterns of
numbers. This finally makes sense to me based on neural network
organization: We are unable to engage in random actions because our
behaviors are guided by patterns established

through previous learning to which we automatically return. And while
not being able to generate random numbers is of little consequence to us
in our day-to-day lives, the tendency to make the same mistakes again
and again is cause for a great deal of human suffering. This tendency to
repeat patterns of thought and behavior is what led the psychoanalyst
Wilhelm Reich to say that people tend to remain sick because they
continue to find the same wrong solutions to the problems they hope to
change. Neural Network Growth and Integration Plasticity then, in the
wide sense of the word, means the possession of a structure weak enough
to yield to an influence, but strong enough not to yield all at once.
---William James The growth and connectivity of neurons is the basic
mechanism of all learning and adaptation. Learning can be reflected in
neural changes in a number of ways, including changes in the
connectivity between existing neurons, the expansion of existing
neurons, and the growth of new neurons. All of these changes are
expressions of plasticity, or the ability of the nervous system to
change in response to experience. Although the first two forms of
plasticity have been recognized in humans for decades, the birth of new
neurons (neurogenesis) was only recently discovered in regions involved
with ongoing learning, such as the hippocampus, the amygdala, and the
frontal and temporal lobes (Eriksson et al., 1998; Gould, Reeves,
Graziano, & Gross, 1999; Gould, Tanapat, Hastings, & Shors, 1999; Gross,
2000). Existing neurons grow though the expansion and branching of the
dendrites they project to other neurons in reaction to new experiences
and learning (Purves & Voyvodic, 1987). This process is reflected in the
connectivity among neurons in our simple schematic diagrams. Neurons
interconnect to form neural networks, and neural networks, in turn,
integrate with one another to perform increasingly complex tasks. For
example, networks that participate in language, emotion, and memory need
to become integrated in order for us to recall and tell an emotionally
meaningful story with the appropriate words, correct details, and proper
affect.

Association areas within the cortex serve the roles of bridging,
coordinating, and directing the multiple neural circuits to which they
are connected. Although the actual mechanisms of this integration are
not yet known, they are likely to include some combination of
communication between local neuronal circuits and the interactions among
functional brain systems (Trojan & Pokorny, 1999). Changes in the
synchrony of activation of multiple neural networks may also play a role
in the coordination of their activity and the emergence of conscious
awareness (Crick, 1994; Konig & Engel, 1995). Genetic Inheritance and
Gene Expression Evolution consists of the gradual transformation of
organisms from one condition of existence to another. ---Ernst Mayr Now
that most of science has gotten beyond the basic debate of nature versus
nurture, we can acknowledge that the growth and organization of the
brain reflects a complex yet subtle blending of genetic and
environmental influences. Toward this end, it is much more helpful to
think of genes in terms of serving both a template and a transcription
function (Kandel, 1998). As templates, genes provide the organization of
the uniform structures of the brain, which are generally unaffected by
environmental influences, except in cases of prenatal genetic
abnormalities. These structures and functions, such as the general
layout of the nervous system and basic reflexes, are inherited via our
DNA and shared by all healthy members of our species. This is the aspect
of genetic inheritance traditionally thought of as "nature." On the
other hand, the expression of many genes depends on experiences that
trigger their transcription (Black, 1998). Transcription genetics
controls the more subtle aspects of the brain's organization, such as
the specific sculpting of later developing neural networks and the
levels of specific neurotransmitters available to different brain
systems. In fact, the majority of our cortex is added after birth in an
experience-dependent fashion through this transcriptional process.
Nurture, therefore, influences brain development via the selective
activation of genes that shape the experience-dependent aspects of
development. How does this happen?

Experience results in the expression of certain genes which trigger the
synthesis of proteins that build neural structures. Through genetic
transcription, existing neurons grow different kinds of receptors,
expand their dendritic structures, and adjust their biochemistry. For
example, although identical twins raised in the same household may have
identical genes for schizophrenia, only one may develop the illness.
This is believed to be the result of the expression of different genes
based on the unique interactions between each child and his or her
environment. The transcription function of genes allows for ongoing
neural plasticity throughout life and provides the basis for enriched
experiences (like psychotherapy) to benefit both the adolescent and
adult brain. In a later chapter we will explore the links between
maternal nurturance and the early building of the brain that result in
different levels of learning, emotional regulation, and attachment
behavior. The Role of Enriched Environments It is always with excitement
that I wake up in the morning.... It's my partner. ---Jonas Salk The
brain is not a static organ; it continually changes in response to
environmental challenges. Because of this, the neural architecture of
the brain comes to embody the environment that shapes it. You could also
think of our neural architecture as a tangible expression of our
learning history. The early research on neural plasticity began by
exploring the impact of different types of environments on brain
development. In these studies done primarily with rats, enriched
environments took the form of more diverse, complex, colorful, and
stimulating habitats, while impoverished environments were relatively
empty monochromatic enclosures. It was found that animals raised in
enriched environments had more neurons, more synaptic connections among
neurons, a greater number of blood capillaries, and more mitochondria
activity (Diamond, Krech, & Rosenweig, 1964; Kempermann, Kuhn, & Gage,
1997, 1998; Kolb & Whishaw, 1998; Sirevaag & Greenough, 1988). These
findings demonstrate that a brain which is challenged comes to be more
complex, active, and robust.

Subsequent research with humans has yielded similar results for
individuals with more education and more complex and challenging
occupations. For humans, enriched environments include the kinds of
challenging educational and experiential opportunities that encourage us
to learn new skills and expand our knowledge. Higher levels of
education, practicing skills, and continued engagement in mental
activities all correlate with more neurons and neural connections
(Jacobs & Scheibel, 1993; Jacobs, Schall, & Scheibel, 1993). Higher
levels of education and reading ability have also been shown to
correlate with a diminished impact of dementia later in life (Schmand,
Smit, Geerlings, & Lindeboom, 1997). Interestingly, brain regions
dedicated to certain skills can actually hijack cells in adjacent neural
areas to serve their needs to develop skills like playing an instrument
or learning Braille (Elbert, Pantev, Wienbruch, Rockstroh, & Taub,
1995). There is no doubt that the human brain grows in response to
challenge and new learning. Psychotherapy can be thought of as a
specific type of enriched environment that promotes social and emotional
development, neural integration, and processing complexity. The way the
brain changes during therapy will depend upon the neural networks
involved in the focus of treatment. Learning and Stress Every stress
leaves an indelible scar, and the organism pays for its survival after a
stressful situation by becoming a little older. ---Hans Selye Mild to
moderate stress (MMS) activates neural growth hormones supportive of new
learning (Cowan & Kandel, 2001; Gould, McEwen, Tanapat, Galea, & Fuchs,
1997; Jablonska, Gierdalski, Kossut, & SkangielKramska, 1999; Myers,
Churchill, Muja, & Garraghty, 2000; Pham, Soderstrom, Henriksson, &
Mohammed, 1997; Zhu & Waite, 1998). Thus, MMS may be utilized to enlist
naturally occurring neurobiological processes in the service of new
learning. Although we use the term stress in animal research, humans
also demonstrate arousal in the form of curiosity, enthusiasm, and
pleasure. Humans can also be motivated to learn new skills and take on
new challenges to relieve discomfort and stress. These

motivational states have all been recognized for their role in
successful outcomes from psychotherapy. Dissociation is a common result
of the high levels of stress associated with traumatic experiences.
Characterized by a disconnection among thoughts, behaviors, sensations,
and emotions, dissociation demonstrates that the coordination and
integration of these functions is an active neurobiological process.
Because all of these functions are seamlessly and unconsciously
interwoven during normal states of awareness, it is easy to overlook the
fact that their integration is a central component of mental health. The
power of mild to moderate levels of stress to trigger neural plasticity
is a key element in the success of psychotherapy or any learning
situation. As opposed to traumatic experiences, the controlled exposure
to stress during therapy enhances new learning and increases neural
integration. As therapists, we intuitively work to regulate stress and
integrate neural networks, a process that is essentially the opposite of
the dissociation observed in reaction to trauma. Healthy functioning
requires proper development and functioning of neural networks
organizing conscious awareness, behavior, emotion, and sensation. As in
early development, the repeated exposure to stress in the supportive
interpersonal context of psychotherapy results in the ability to
tolerate increasing levels of arousal. This process reflects the
building and integration of cortical circuits and their increasing
ability to inhibit and regulate subcortical activation. Affect
regulation, especially the modulation and inhibition of anxiety and
fear, allows for continued cortical processing in the face of strong
emotions, allowing for ongoing cognitive flexibility, learning, and
neural integration. In this process the therapist plays essentially the
same role as a parent, providing and modeling the regulatory functions
of the social brain. As affect is repeatedly brought into the
therapeutic relationship and successfully managed, the client gradually
internalizes these skills by sculpting the neural structures necessary
for autoregulation. As in childhood, the repeated cycle of attunement,
rupture of the attunement, and its reestablishment gradually creates an
expectation of reconnection (Lachmann & Beebe, 1996). The learned
expectation of relief in the future enhances the ability to tolerate
more intense affect in the midst of the stressful moment.

As a therapist, one of my primary goals is to shift my clients'
experience of anxiety from an unconscious trigger for avoidance to a
conscious cue for curiosity and exploration. One of my patients
described it metaphorically as using anxiety as a compass to help guide
him to and through his unconscious fears. Becoming aware of anxiety is
then followed with an exploration and eventual understanding of what we
are afraid of and why. The next step is to move toward the anxiety with
an understanding of its meaning and significance. In this way, anxiety
becomes woven into a conscious narrative with the possibility of writing
a new outcome to our story. This process reflects the integration of
cortical linguistic processing with conditioned subcortical arousal in
the service of inhibiting, regulating, and modifying maladaptive
reactions. As we will see later when discussing the building of the
social brain, biological and environmental factors during childhood can
result in long periods of dysregulation. Early deprivation or chronic
stress increase the chances of damage to the brain, deficits in memory
and reality testing, and the prolonged utilization of primitive defenses
(Brown, Henning, & Wellman, 2005; Radley et al., 2006; Sapolsky, 1985).
With increased nurturance and support, stress hormone levels decrease;
physical comfort and soothing talk with caretakers helps the brain to
integrate experience. Emotional Tolerance and Affect Regulation Few
things are brought to a successful issue by impetuous desire, but most
by calm and prudent forethought. ---Thucydides Although we usually think
of the cortex as a giant hard drive capable of storing huge amounts of
data, another primary role of the cortex is inhibition. Take for example
the grasping reflex we are all born with. This powerful grip allowed our
ancestors to hold onto their mothers as they moved through trees and
over land. During the early months of life this grasping reflex is soon
inhibited by descending cortical circuitry. The inhibition of this and
other reflexes allow for a cortical takeover of these functions during
development. So we sacrifice the grasping reflex for the finger
dexterity necessary to manipulate digits, write, and use tools. Later in
life if we have the misfortune of succumbing to dementia, this and other

early reflexes begin to reappear as our cortex gradually loses its
inhibitory ability. In a similar fashion, our prefrontal cortex is
shaped by experience to inhibit and control subcortical functional
activation, which eventually results in our ability to regulate our
emotions. Early attachment relationships establish the experiences that
shape these neural networks and allow us to regulate our emotional
experience. Assistance with experiencing increasing levels of positive
and negative affect is a vital component of both parenting and
psychotherapy. The gradually increasing tolerance for stress builds our
brains, expands neural organization of emotional and cognitive
integration, and creates networks of descending control to help inhibit
and regulate affect (Schore, 1994). Emerging from childhood with an
ability to experience a range of emotions and tolerate stress serves
both as a means of brain growth and continued development throughout
life. During our first few years, we have the repeated experiences of
going from a comfortable, regulated state to a state of dysregulation.
We become frightened, cold, wet, and hungry, and show our displeasure
with facial expressions, bodily postures, vocalization, and crying. In
the presence of good-enough parenting, our signals are attended to, the
source of our displeasure diagnosed, and we are helped back into a
regulated state. Across thousands of these temporal-emotional
experiences, we go from regulation to dysregulation to reregulation.
These experiences shape secure attachment and the expectation of
positive outcomes. The summation of these experiences, stored throughout
our nervous system, becomes the sensorymotion-emotional background of
our experience. In the absence of adequate assistance in regulating
affect or making sense of emotions, the brain organizes a variety of
defensive coping strategies. These defenses vary in the degree to which
they distort reality in order to achieve their goal of reducing anxiety.
This distortion is accomplished in circuits of unconscious memory that
control anxiety and fear (Critchley et al., 2000). The neural
connections that result in defenses shape our lives by selecting what we
approach and avoid, what our attention is drawn to, and the assumptions
we use to organize our experiences. Our cortex then provides us with
rationalizations and beliefs about our behaviors that help keep our
coping strategies and defenses in place, possibly for a lifetime. These
neural and psychic structures can lead to either psychological and
physical health, or illness and disability.

Psychopathology and Neural Network Integration In a structure as complex
as the human brain a multitude of things can go wrong. The wonder is
that for most people the brain functions effectively. ---Seymour Kety If
everything we experience is represented by instantiations within neural
networks, then by definition, psychopathology of all kinds---from the
mildest neurotic symptoms to the most severe psychosis---must also be
represented within and among neural networks. In line with this theory,
psychopathology would be a reflection of suboptimal development,
integration, and coordination of neural networks. Patterns of
dysregulation of brain activation found in disorders such as depression
and obsessivecompulsive disorder support the theory of a brain-based
explanation for the symptoms of psychopathology. Difficulties in early
caretaking, genetic and biological vulnerabilities, or trauma at any
time during life can result in the lack of integration among networks.
Unresolved trauma can cause ongoing information processing deficits that
disrupt integrated neural processing. For example, dissociative symptoms
following trauma---reflecting the disconnection among networks of
behavior, emotion, sensation, and cognition---predict the later
development of posttraumatic stress disorder (Koopman, Classen, &
Spiegel, 1994; McFarlane & Yehuda, 1996). Children victimized by
psychological, physical, and sexual abuse have a greater probability of
demonstrating electrophysiological abnormalities in executive regions of
the brain vital to neural network integration (Ito et al., 1993; Teicher
et al., 1997). In general, psychological integration suggests that the
conscious cognitive functions of the executive brain have access to
information across networks of sensation, behavior, and emotion. A
primary focus of neural integration in traditional talk psychotherapy is
between networks of affect and cognition. Dissociation between the two
occurs when high levels of stress inhibit or disrupt the brain's
integrative abilities among the left and right cerebral hemispheres as
well as among the cortex and limbic regions. The integration of the left
and right hemispheres can be disrupted while the

circuits of the reptilian and paleomammalian brains can be unlinked from
the conscious neomammalian cortex. This unlinking may not be an
evolutionary accident. As valuable as language can be for humans,
evolution appears to have selected for the shutdown of language (and a
decrease in cognitive processing) when confronted with threat. The
resulting disruption of information processing may be the most common
cause of neural network dissociation. Cortical networks responsible for
memory, language, and executive control (in its many forms) become
inhibited and underperform during times of overwhelming stress. The very
way that the brain has evolved to successfully cope with immediate
threat appears to have created a vulnerability to longer term
psychological distress: Enter psychotherapy. Applying this model,
psychotherapy is a means of creating or restoring coordination among
various neural networks. Research has demonstrated that successful
psychotherapy correlates with changes in activation in areas of the
brain hypothesized to be involved in disorders such as obsessive
compulsive disorder and depression (Baxter et al., 1992; Brody, Saxena,
Mandelkern, et al., 2001; Brody, Saxena, Schwartz, et al., 1998;
Schwartz, Stoessel, Baxter, Martin, & Phelps, 1996). The return to
normal levels of activation and homeostatic balance results in
reestablishing positive reciprocal control among relevant neural
structures and networks. Psychotherapy and Neural Network Integration
The only thing they (neural connections) can do...is to deepen old paths
or to make new ones. ---William James A basic assumption of both
neuroscience and psychotherapy is that optimal functioning and mental
health are related to increasingly advanced levels of growth,
integration, and complexity. On a neurological level, this equates to
the integration and communication of neural networks dedicated to
emotion, cognition, sensation, and behavior and a proper balance between
excitation and inhibition. On an experiential level, integration is the
ability to live life---love and work---while employing a minimum of
defensiveness. Growth and integration are optimized by a positive early
environment, including stage-appropriate challenges, support, and
parents

who are capable and willing to put feelings into words. These factors
lead to positive affect regulation, biological homeostasis, and a quiet
internal milieu allowing for the consolidation of the experience of
subjectivity and a positive sense of self. From the perspective of
neuroscience, psychotherapy can be understood as a specific kind of
enriched environment designed to enhance the growth of neurons and the
integration of neural networks. The therapeutic environment is
individually tailored to fit the symptoms and needs of each client. I
propose here that all forms of therapy, regardless of theoretical
orientation, will be successful to the degree to which they foster
appropriate neuroplasticity. Further, I also propose that neural
plasticity, growth, and integration in psychotherapy are enhanced by: 1.
The establishment of a safe and trusting relationship. 2. Mild to
moderate levels of stress. 3. Activating both emotion and cognition. 4.
The co-construction of new personal narratives. Although
psychotherapists do not generally think in "neuroscientific" terms,
stimulating neuroplasticity and neural integration is essentially what
we do. We provide information to clients about our understanding of
their difficulties in the form of psychoeducation, interpretations, or
reality testing. We encourage clients to engage in behaviors, express
feelings, and become conscious of aspects of themselves of which they
may be unaware. We dare them to take risks. We guide them back and forth
between thoughts and feelings, trying to help them establish new
connections between the two. We help clients alter their description of
themselves and the world, incorporating new awareness and encouraging
better decision making. With successful treatment, the methods being
used are internalized so that clients can gain independence from therapy
and we do this all in the context of a warm, supportive, committed, and
consistent relationship. These same factors are at play across
psychodynamic, systems, and cognitivebehavioral approaches to treatment.
The broad context in which these processes can successfully occur is one
of increasing levels of affect tolerance and regulation and the
development of integrative narratives that emerge from the
client--therapist

relationship. In the context of empathic attunement within a safe and
structured environment, clients are encouraged to tolerate the anxiety
of feared experiences, memories, and thoughts. In this process, neural
networks that are normally inhibited become activated and available for
inclusion into conscious processing (Siegel, 1995). Interpretations in
psychodynamic therapy, exposure in behavioral therapies, or experiments
in differentiation from a systems perspective all focus on this goal.
Through the activation of multiple cognitive and emotional networks,
previously dissociated functions are integrated and gradually brought
under the control of cortical executive functions. Narratives
co-constructed with therapists provide a new template for thoughts,
behaviors, and ongoing integration. Pathways of Integration It is the
harmony of the diverse parts, their symmetry, their happy balance; in a
word it is all that introduces order, all that gives unity. ---Henri
Poincaré Given that information flows simultaneously in multiple
directions through many neural networks, optimal neural integration
likely involves maximizing the flow and flexibility of energy through
neural networks (Pribram, 1991). Using this model, psychopathology can
be caused by difficulties not just in a specific region of the brain,
but also in the interactions among participating systems (Mayberg, 1997;
Mayberg et al., 1999). Numerous processing networks combine affect,
sensation, behavior, and conscious awareness into an integrated,
functional, and balanced whole ---the neural substrate for what Freud
called the ego. The ego is essentially shorthand for how the
organization of the self comes to be expressed in dimensions such as
personality, affect regulation, coping styles, and selfimage. The
primary directions of information flow relevant to psychotherapy are
top-down (cortical to subcortical and back again) and left-right (across
the two halves of the cortex). Keep in mind that these information loops
need to communicate with each other as well as with many other
processing systems. Top-down or bottom-up integration would include
MacLean's linkup among the three levels of the triune brain and the
unification of the body, emotion, and conscious awareness. This is
called top-down because

these circuits form loops that go from the top of our head down into the
depths of the brain and back up again. Top-down integration includes the
ability of the cortex to process, inhibit, and organize the reflexes,
impulses, and emotions generated by the brainstem and limbic system
(Alexander et al., 1986; Cummings, 1993). Frontal lobe disorders often
result in a disinhibition of impulses and movements normally under its
control such as obsessive-compulsive and attention deficit disorders.
Within this category I include what has been referred to as
dorsal-ventral integration, connecting cortical with limbic processing
(Panksepp, 1998; Tucker, Luu, & Pribram, 1995). Left-right or right-left
integration involves abilities that require the input of both the left
and right cerebral cortex and lateralized limbic regions for optimal
functioning. For example, adequate language production requires an
integration of the grammatical functions of the left and the emotional
functions of the right. Left-right integration allows us to put feelings
into words, consider feelings in conscious awareness, and balance the
positive and negative affective biases of the left and right hemispheres
(Silberman & Weingartner, 1986). A balance among the left and right
prefrontal cortices is also necessary for the proper balance of affect
and emotion. Alexithymia (the inability to put words to feelings) and
somatization disorder (the conversion of emotional conflicts into bodily
illness) may reflect left-right dissociation (Hoppe & Bogen, 1977).
There is also evidence that depression and mania correlate with
dysregulation of the balance of activation between the left and right
prefrontal cortices (Baxter et al., 1985; Field, Healy, Goldstein,
Perry, & Bendell, 1988). The right hemisphere is more highly connected
with the body and the more primitive and emotional aspects of
functioning. The left hemisphere is more closely identified with
cortical functioning, whereas the right is more densely connected with
limbic and brainstem functions (Shapiro, Jamner, & Spence, 1997). For
example, states of stress, anxiety, and fear result in increased
activation in the right cortex and subcortical structures (Rauch et al.,
1996; Wittling, 1997). This bias is also relevant to the organization of
social emotional attachment patterns, transference, and affect
regulation (Minagawa-Kawai et al., 2008). Much of the integration of
top-down and left-right systems is mediated through interactions among
regions of the frontal cortex, our primary executive system.

Due to the interconnectivity between left-right and top-down neural
networks, examining integration from either the vertical or horizontal
dimension alone is overly simplistic. Studies of metabolic activity in
specific areas of the brain in pathological states reveal differences in
both cortical and subcortical structures on both sides of the brain.
This research suggests that restoring neural integration requires the
simultaneous reregulation of networks on both vertical and horizontal
planes. It is also important to remember that although we are discussing
brain functioning from the perspective of neural networks, an equally
meaningful discussion could focus on the impact of pharmacological
agents on the modulation and homeostatic balance of these same networks
(Coplan & Lydiard, 1998). This perspective helps us to understand why
both psychotherapy and medication can result in shifts of neural
activity and symptom reduction and why together they may work better
than either one alone (Andreasen, 2001). Neural network integration can
also be accomplished through the activation of conscious language
production (top and left) with more primitive, emotional, and
unconscious processes (down and right) that have been dissociated due to
stress or trauma. Depending on their theoretical orientation, therapists
facilitate the process of network integration by supplying challenges of
all kinds. An analyst may use interpretations to enhance awareness of
inhibited, repressed, or dissociated thoughts and emotions. A
cognitive-behavioral therapist will expose a client to a feared stimulus
combined with relaxation training, allowing normally inhibited cortical
circuitry to integrate with the subcortical circuitry that controls
fear. Research across all forms of psychotherapy supports the hypothesis
that positive outcomes are related to utilizing both support and
challenge in the combined engagement of thought and affect (Orlinsky &
Howard, 1986). Both the quality of the interpersonal connection and
creating the proper learning environment appear essential. Psychotherapy
and Parenting Parents are like shuttles on a loom. They join the threads
of the past with threads of the future and leave their own bright
patterns as they go. ---Fred Rogers

We have talked a little about the parallels between positive parenting
and successful psychotherapy; these similarities reflect the commonality
of the conditions required for building and rebuilding the brain. Mutual
eye gaze and escalating positive emotional interactions between parent
and child stimulate the growth and organization of the brain. In the
future, we may discover scientific evidence that the interpersonal
experience of psychotherapy impacts the neurobiological environment of
the brain in ways that stimulate neural plasticity and neurogenesis.
Although the various schools of therapy tend to accentuate their
differences, the therapeutic relationship itself may be the most
powerful curative agent. The warmth, acceptance, and unconditional
positive regard demonstrated by Carl Rogers's work embodies the broad
interpersonal environment for the initial growth of the brain and
continued development later in life (Rogers, 1942). Having spent a brief
period of time with Dr. Rogers as a student, I can attest to the power
of his interpersonal style and therapeutic technique. I am sure he left
many, including myself, with the fantasy of being available for
adoption. Primary goals of parenting include providing a child with the
capacity for self-soothing and the ability to form positive
relationships. This allows the child to face the challenges of life and
benefit from healing life experiences. The successful mastery of
challenges throughout life leads to taking on even more complex
challenges that will promote increasingly higher levels of neural
network development and integration. When internal or external factors
prevent an individual from approaching challenging and stressful
situations, neural systems will tend to remain underdeveloped or
unintegrated. In a review of hundreds of studies examining the outcome
of psychotherapy, Orlinsky and Howard (1986) looked for those factors
that seemed to relate to success. They found that the quality of the
emotional connection between patient and therapist was far more
important than the therapist's theoretical orientation. Patients who are
motivated to change and are able to work collaboratively with their
therapists also do better. Therapists' professional experience was
positively related to success, as were the use of interpretation, a
focus on transference, and the expression of emotion. The continual
involvement of both cognitive and emotional processing during treatment
seems essential for positive change.

Psychotherapy, like parenting, is neither mechanical nor generic. Each
therapist--client pair creates a unique relationship resulting in a
particular outcome. The importance of the unconscious processes of both
parent and therapist is highlighted by their active participation in the
co-construction of new narratives of their children and patients. As we
will see in research on attachment, each parent's unconscious plays a
role in the creation of the child's brain, just as the therapist's
unconscious contributes to the context and outcome of therapy. This
underscores the importance of proper training and adequate personal
therapy for therapists, who will be putting their imprint on the hearts,
minds, and brains of their clients. Summary In this chapter we have
explored some initial concepts in the integration of psychotherapy and
neuroscience based on common principles within both fields. We have
equated psychological health with optimal neural network growth and
integration. Both the brain and the self are built in a stepwise manner
by experience. The nervous system is made up of millions of neurons
while human experience is constructed within countless moments of
learning. The psychological difficulties for which patients seek
psychotherapy are a function of inadequate growth and integration within
and between these same networks. The aspects of development that foster
positive brain development and those in therapy that promote positive
change are emotional attunement, affect regulation, and the
co-construction of narratives. In the following chapter, we turn our
attention to major models of psychotherapy in use today. By examining
their theories and techniques, we will see how they have been shaped by
underlying principles related to the growth and integration of neural
networks. It is my belief that the development of psychotherapy has
always been implicitly guided by the principles of neuroscience. All
forms of therapy are successful to the degree to which they have found a
way to tap into processes that build and modify neural structures within
the brain. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3

Neural Integration in Different Models of Psychotherapy The techniques
of behavior therapy and psychotherapy have relied on the principles of
brain plasticity, generally without realizing it, for nearly one hundred
years. ---Nancy Andreasen Like other scientific discoveries,
psychotherapy developed from a combination of trial-and-error learning,
the intuition of its founder, and plain luck. Each school of
psychotherapy offers an explanation of mental health and illness as well
as why its strategies and techniques are effective. Fortunately, the
effectiveness of an intervention does not depend on the accuracy of the
theory used to support it. For example, there was a time when
psychoanalysts attributed the success of electroshock therapy to the
need of a depressed person to be punished. The treatment worked and
still works despite the lack of a solid understanding of its mechanisms
of action. Although each approach to psychotherapy is experienced as a
fundamental truth by its disciples, all modes of therapy are actually
heuristics. Heuristics are interpretations of experience or ways of
understanding phenomena. The value of a heuristic lies in its ability to
organize, explain, and predict what we observe. Neuroscience is another
heuristic, one that we are using in the present discussion to explain
the mechanisms of action of psychotherapy; in other words how and why it
works. It is my belief that neuroscience is a helpful heuristic that
will lead us to a fuller understanding of the process of psychotherapy
and may also serve as a rational means of selecting, combining, and
evaluating treatment modalities. In this chapter we examine, in broad
strokes, some of the primary approaches to psychotherapy. These
overviews are presented in order to

provide a context in which to understand and organize the
neuroscientific concepts in the coming chapters. In taking a sample of
general theoretical approaches to psychotherapy, we will look for common
elements among them, and how these elements may relate to neural network
development and change. Remember, from the perspective of neuroscience,
psychotherapists are in the brain-rebuilding business. Psychoanalytic
and Psychodynamic Therapies Being entirely honest with oneself is a good
exercise. ---Sigmund Freud Freud's psychoanalysis, the original form of
psychodynamic therapy, has spun off countless variants in its
century-long existence. Ego psychology, self-psychology, and schools of
thought connected to names such as Klein, Kernberg, and Kohut have all
attracted considerable followings. Despite their differences,
psychodynamic forms of therapy share theoretical assumptions such as the
existence of the unconscious, the power of early childhood experiences,
and the existence of defenses that distort reality in order to reduce
anxiety and enhance coping. The exploration of the unconscious and its
connection to our evolutionary past may be Freud's greatest legacy. He
remained true to Charcot by exploring the multiple levels of human
awareness and designed many techniques to bring the unconscious into
conscious awareness. The power of trauma, especially during childhood,
and its ability to shape the organization of the mind were also examined
in great detail. Freud theorized that early attachment and relational
difficulties, neglect, or trauma result in developmental arrests or
"fixations" that delay or derail the adult's potential to love and work.
From the standpoint of neurobiology, most of Freud's work addressed the
discontinuities and dissociations between networks of conscious and
unconscious processing. Freud focused on the role of overwhelming
emotion as the cause of unintegrated neural processing. Freud's psychic
self contains the primitive drives (id), the demands of civilization to
conform for the benefit of the group (superego), and those parts of the
self (ego) that attempt to negotiate the naturally occurring conflicts
between the two. In its role as a diplomat in the fight between id

and superego, the ego utilizes many elaborate defenses to cope with
reality. Ego strength, or our ability to navigate reality with a minimum
of defensiveness, reflects the integration of neural networks of emotion
and thought, and the development of mature defenses. The more primitive
or immature the defense mechanism, the more reality is distorted and the
more functional impairment occurs. Sublimation, for example, enables us
to convert unacceptable impulses into constructive and prosocial goals.
Mature defenses, like sublimation or humor, allow us to assuage strong
feelings, keep in contact with others, and remain attuned to a shared
social reality. Less mature defenses, such as denial and dissociation,
result in greater distortion of reality and difficulties in both work
and relationships. Defenses are often invisible to their owners because
they are organized by hidden layers of neural processing that are
inaccessible to conscious awareness. What Freud called defenses can be
seen as ways in which neural networks have adapted to cope with
emotional stress. People seek treatment when their defense mechanisms
cannot adequately cope with repressed emotions, or when symptoms become
intolerable. Despite a conscious awareness that something may be wrong,
the hidden layers of neural processing continue to organize the world
based on the prior experiences that shaped them. As we will see in later
chapters, the neural circuitry involved with fear has a tenacious memory
and can invisibly influence conscious awareness for a lifetime. Part of
psychodynamic therapy is an exploration and uncovering of this
unconscious organization of experience. Freud's projective hypothesis
described the process by which our brains create and organize the world
around us. As the clarity of a situation decreases, the brain naturally
generates structure and projects it onto the world. The way we organize
and understand ambiguous stimuli gives us clues about the architecture
of the hidden layers of neural processing (how our unconscious organizes
the world). From the projective hypothesis came the invention of
projective tests such as Rorschach's ink blots, free association, and an
emphasis on the importance of dreams as the "royal road to the
unconscious." As part of the projective hypothesis, psychodynamic
therapists often provide minimal information about themselves, allowing
the client to project onto them implicit (unconscious) memories from
past relationships. This form of projection, transference, results in
the client placing

expectations and emotions from earlier relationships on the therapist,
which allows them to be experienced and worked through firsthand. It is
through this transference that early relationships for which we have no
conscious recollection are brought fully into therapy. Freud felt that
the evocation and resolution of the transference was a core component of
a successful analysis. In Freud's words, only transference renders "the
invaluable service of making the patient's buried and forgotten love
emotions actual and manifest" (Freud, 1975, Chapter 7). Resistance
represents aspects of implicit memory presented by the client that it is
up to the therapist to decipher. Early experiences of rejection,
criticism, or neglect from parents result in shame, which can evolve
into a child's negative self-image. The resultant self-criticism
(superego) manifests in disrespect for anyone who shows the child love
or respect. An example of this is expressed in the Groucho Marx line,
"I'd never join a club that would have me as a member." In therapy, this
may manifest as a strong distrust of the therapist's intentions or his
or her ability to be of help. Interpretations are one of the
psychodynamic therapist's most important tools. Sometimes called the
"therapist's scalpel," interpretations attempt to make the unconscious
conscious. Based on observations of all levels of the client's behavior,
the therapist attempts to bring the processing of the hidden layers to
the client's attention. Repeated and skillful attention to unconscious
material via interpretations, confrontations, and clarifications results
in a gradually expanding awareness of unconscious processes and the
integration of dissociated top-down and right-left processing networks.
Accurate, successful interpretations are sometimes accompanied by
feelings of disorganization, anger, or depression. This is because when
defenses are made conscious and are exposed for what they are, they lose
their effectiveness, leading to a disinhibition of the emotions that
they have been successfully defending against. In other words, the
networks containing the negative emotions become disinhibited and
activated. For example, if intellectualization is being used to avoid
the shame and depression related to early criticism, recognition of the
defense will bring these feelings and related memories to awareness.
Emotions play a central role in the success of psychodynamic therapies.
The neural networks that organize emotions are often shaped to guide us
away from thoughts and feelings for which we were punished or abandoned.
Unconscious anxiety signals continue to shape our behavior,

leading us to remain on tried-and-true paths and avoid situations that
trigger our unremembered past. An emphasis on the evocation of emotion
and cognition is an important contribution of psychoanalysis and
reflects fundamental underlying neurobiological processes of health and
illness. Across psychodynamic forms of therapy, conscious awareness is
expanded, emotions are explored, and the expression of repressed or
inhibited emotions is encouraged. Feelings, thoughts, and behaviors are
repeatedly juxtaposed, combined, and recombined in the process of
working through. The assumptions and narratives from the past are edited
based on new information, and those about the present and future are
reevaluated. The overall goal is combining emotion with conscious
awareness and rewriting the story of the self. These processes, when
successful, enhance the growth, integration, and flexibility of neural
networks and human experience. Rogerian or Client-Centered Therapy The
curious paradox is that when I accept myself just as I am, then I can
change. ---Carl Rogers Against the dominant background of
psychoanalysis, Carl Rogers (1942) emerged with a form of therapy he
referred to as "client-centered." In stark contrast to a theory-based
analysis of the patient, Rogers emphasized creating a relationship that
maximized the individual's opportunity for selfdiscovery. Rogers's
approach gained rapid acceptance in the nonmedical community and by the
1960s came to be the dominant form of counseling (Gilliland & James,
1998). When different approaches to therapy are compared for
effectiveness, the general agreement is that the perceived quality of
the client--therapist relationship has the highest correlation with
reported treatment success. Some have gone as far as saying that the
curative element is the therapeutic relationship itself, rather than any
specific techniques. This would certainly have been Rogers's belief, for
he believed that the curative aspects of therapy were the therapist's
warmth, acceptance, genuineness, and unconditional positive regard. His
emphasis on interpersonal congruence foreshadowed the focus on emotional
resonance and empathic attunement

in later-emerging forms of psychotherapy such as object relations and
intersubjectivity (Kohut, 1984; Stolorow & Atwood, 1979). Over the last
century, the therapist attributes suggested by Rogers and what we have
come to think of as the best possible attitudes for optimal parenting
have become essentially identical. Rogerian principles lead to a
minimized need for defensiveness and shame while maximizing
expressiveness, exploration, and risk taking. Rogers was likely
describing the best interpersonal environment for brain growth during
development and neural plasticity in psychotherapy when he stated that
client-centered therapy "aims directly toward the greater independence
and integration of the individual rather than hoping that such results
will accrue if the counselor assists in solving the problem. The
individual and not the problem is the focus. The aim is not to solve one
particular problem, but to assist the individual to grow, so that he can
cope with the present problem and later problems in a better-integrated
fashion" (Rogers, 1942, Chapter 2). During my training in
client-centered therapy, I was struck by the power of Rogers's approach.
I found it immensely difficult to maintain his supportive stance, and
often struggled to keep myself from directing my clients, giving advice,
and pushing them to change. To my astonishment, I found that providing
clients with a supportive relationship led to insights on their part
that mirrored the interpretations I struggled to suppress. Clients often
expressed a mixture of sadness and appreciation when they realized how
much they longed to be listened to without fear of judgment and shame.
What might be going on in the brain of a client in client-centered
therapy? In the Rogerian interpersonal context, a client would most
likely experience the widest range of emotions within the ego
scaffolding of an empathic other. The activation of neural networks of
emotion makes feelings and emotional memories available for
reorganization. Rogers's nondirective method activates clients'
executive networks and their selfreflective abilities. Supportive
rephrasing and clarification of what clients say may also enhance
executive functioning. This simultaneous activation of cognition and
emotion, enhanced perspective, and the emotional regulation offered by
the relationship may provide an optimal environment for neural change.
Clients, scaffolded by the therapist's support and stimulated by his or
her words, can then work to rewrite their stories.

We know that social interactions early in life result in the stimulation
of both neurotransmitters and neural growth hormones that participate in
the active building of the brain. By recreating a positive parenting
relationship, it is likely that the empathic connectedness promoted by
Rogers actually stimulates biochemical changes in the brain capable of
enhancing new learning. For example, studies with birds have
demonstrated that the ability to learn their songs is enhanced when
exposed to live singing birds versus tape recordings of the same songs
(Baptista & Petrinovich, 1986). Other birds are actually unable to learn
from tape recordings and require positive social interactions and
nurturance in order to learn (Eales, 1985). We will see later how
maternal contact and nurturance in rats protect the brain from the
damaging effects of stress (Meaney, Aitken, Viau, Sharma, & Sarrieau,
1989; Plotsky & Meaney, 1993). Studies such as these demonstrate that
social relationships have the power to stimulate the neural plasticity
required for new learning. The interpersonal and emotional aspects of
the therapeutic relationship, referred to as a nonspecific factor in the
psychotherapy outcome literature, may be the primary mechanism of
therapeutic action. As we will see in a later chapter, these nonspecific
factors are, in fact, quite specific, as early maternal care has been
linked to increased neural plasticity, emotional regulation, and
attachment behavior. In other words, those who are nurtured best survive
best within a positive and safe environment. Unfortunately, the social
isolation created by certain psychological defenses reinforces the
rigidity of neural organization as the client avoids the interpersonal
contexts required to promote healing. In these instances, the
therapeutic relationship may serve as a bridge to once again connect
with others. Cognitive Therapies It's not what happens to you, but how
you react to it that matters. ---Epictetus Cognitive therapies highlight
the centrality of a person's thoughts, appraisals, and beliefs in
guiding his or her feelings and actions. They emphasize that negative
thoughts, skewed appraisals, and erroneous beliefs can create
psychological problems. Cognitive therapy focuses on the identification
and modification of dysfunctional thoughts with the ultimate

goal of improved affect regulation (Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery, 1979;
Ellis, 1962). The primary targets of cognitive-behavioral therapy have
been depression, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder, phobias, and
panic disorders. Depressed patients tend to evaluate their world in
absolute terms, take details out of context, and experience neutral
comments and events as negative. Common depressive thoughts include the
expectation of failure despite many past successes, and thoughts that
one is alone despite being surrounded by friends and family. In
cognitive therapy, the patient is educated about these common
distortions and encouraged to engage in reality testing and self-talk
designed to counteract negative reflexive statements. In anxiety
disorders, fear comes to organize and control the patients' lives. High
levels of anxiety inhibit and distort rational cognitive processing.
Cognitive interventions with these patients often include educating them
about the physiological symptoms of anxiety such as a racing heart,
shortness of breath, and sweaty palms. These patients are taught that
feelings of dread are secondary to autonomic symptoms and should not be
taken as seriously as they feel. A focus on understanding normal
biological processes usually redirects the client away from catastrophic
attributions that serve to increase anxiety. With clients suffering with
phobias or PTSD, psychoeducation is combined with exposure and response
prevention, in which the client faces the feared stimulus (e.g.,
venturing outside or thinking about a negative event) without being
allowed to retreat back to the safety of home or a state of denial.
Exposure is usually systematic, gradual, and paired with relaxation
training used to aid in the downregulation of physiological arousal.
This process combines increased cortical processing (thought) with
subcortical activation (emotion) to allow for integration with cortical
circuitry in order to permit habituation, inhibition, and eventual
extinction via descending cortical networks. How does this translate
into what is going on in the brain during cognitive therapy? Research
has demonstrated that disorders of anxiety and depression correlate with
changes in metabolic balance among different brain regions. For example,
symptoms of depression correlate with activation imbalance within the
prefrontal cortex---lower levels of activation in the left and higher
levels in the right (Baxter et al., 1985; Field

et al., 1988). This supports the hypothesis that mental health
correlates with the proper homeostatic balance between neural networks.
Symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder correlate with changes in
activation in the medial (middle) portions of the frontal cortex and a
subcortical structure called the caudate nucleus (Rauch et al., 1994).
Posttraumatic flashbacks and states of high arousal correlate with
higher levels of activation in rightsided limbic and medial frontal
structures. Importantly, high arousal also correlates with decreased
metabolism in the expressive language centers of the left hemisphere
(Rauch et al., 1996). Of all the different types of therapy, specific
links have been found between successful cognitive-behavioral therapy
and changes in brain functioning. As described in the last chapter,
changes in brain functioning and symptomatology in both
obsessive-compulsive disorder and depression have been found after
successful psychotherapy (Baxter et al., 1992; Brody, Saxena,
Mandelkern, et al., 2001; Brody, Saxena, Schwartz, et al., 1998;
Schwartz et al., 1996). These findings strongly suggest that therapists
can utilize cognition to alter the relationship among neural networks in
a way that impacts their balance of activation and inhibition. In
striving to activate cortical processing through conscious control of
thoughts and feelings, these therapies enhance left cortical processing,
inhibiting and regulating right hemispheric balance and subcortical
activation. The reestablishment of hemispheric and top-down regulation
allows for increases in positive attitudes and a sense of safety that
counteract the depressing and frightening effects of right hemisphere
and subcortical (amygdala) dominance (Ochsner & Gross, 2008). Although
cognitive-behavioral therapy is carried out in an interpersonal context
of collaboration and support, it places far less emphasis on the
therapeutic relationship than do Rogerian and psychodynamic approaches.
The inherent wisdom of this approach with depressed and anxious patients
lies in the fact that disorders of affect need activation of cortical
executive structures. Given that emotions are contagious, a deeper
emotional connection might result in the therapist attuning to
dysregulated states and sharing in the patient's depressed, anxious, and
panicky feelings. While emotional attunement with these feelings is
helpful, it has been my experience that after the working relationship
is established, challenging thoughts and encouraging new behaviors can
often be far more beneficial to the therapeutic process than empathy
alone. The structured aspect of

cognitive-behavioral therapy may protect both therapist and patient from
the power of negative affect. Systemic Family Therapy We must not allow
other people's limited perceptions to define us. ---Virginia Satir There
is increasing evidence that neural networks throughout the brain are
stimulated to grow and organize by interaction with the social
environment. Early relationships become encoded in networks of sensory,
motor, and emotional learning to form what dynamic therapists call inner
objects. These inner objects have the power to soothe, arouse, and
dysregulate, depending on the quality of our attachment experiences with
significant others. These unconscious memories organize our inner worlds
when we are with others and when we are alone. Thus, we constantly
experience ourselves in the context of others. This is one reason
systems therapists question the validity of diagnosing and treating
people in isolation. They believe that in our day-to-day experience we
simultaneously exist in two realities: our present families and our
multigenerational family histories. This perspective is especially
relevant when working with children who have yet to form clear ego
boundaries between themselves and their family. Some adult patients who
have not successfully individuated also demonstrate unclear boundaries
between their own thoughts and feelings and those of family members.
Regardless of age, however, the basic principles are the same. Murray
Bowen, a prime contributor to systems thinking, presented a model that
is compatible with an exploration of the underlying neuroscience of
psychotherapy. His perspective is based on the recognition that a family
provides both emotional regulation and a platform for differentiation.
He defines differentiation as the development of autonomy---a balance
between the recognition of the needs of self and others. Differentiation
involves the regulation of anxiety and a balance of integration of
affect and cognition. Bowen would say that anxiety is the enemy of
differentiation. That is, the more frightened people are, the more
likely they are to dissociate and the more dependent and primitive they
become in their interaction with others (Bowen, 1978).

When this regression occurs, family members try---consciously and
unconsciously---to shape the family in a manner that reduces their own
anxiety. The alcoholic needs the problem to go unmentioned, while the
family needs to put on a good front to the outside world. Dysfunctional
family patterns such as this one sacrifice the growth and well-being of
one or more members (often the children) to reduce the overall level of
anxiety in the family. The cognitive, emotional, and social world of an
alcoholic family is shaped by the avoidance of feelings, thoughts, and
activities that expose their shameful secret to conscious awareness and
the outside world. The development of the children becomes distorted by
the adaptations necessary for their survival within the pathological
system. Unfortunately, the roles and rules of the family designed to
decrease anxiety maintain the pathologies of some and create new
pathologies in others. Over time, the dysfunction becomes embedded in
the personality and neural architecture of everyone in the family and
they collude to maintain the system, because they now all require the
status quo in order to feel safe. These experiences become embedded into
their neural architecture and are carried forward into adult
relationships. As a result, many of us re-create the dysfunction from
our family of origin in our choice of partners and how we shape the
families we build as adults. Each family's problems are determined by
the multigenerational, unconscious shaping of both neural structure and
behavior. The functioning of brains and family dynamics reflects how
they have been organized. The dysfunctional brain, like the
dysfunctional family, is shaped by the avoidance of thoughts and
feelings, resulting in the dissociation of neural systems of affect,
cognition, sensation, and behavior, as well as a lack of human
differentiation. As in other forms of psychotherapy, the goal of systems
therapy is to integrate and balance the various cortical and
subcortical, left and right hemisphere processing networks. This process
requires a decrease in anxiety from high to low or moderate levels. High
levels of affect block thinking, whereas moderate levels enhance
neuroplastic processes, which in turn support cognition and emotion. In
essence, Bowen is highlighting that the simultaneous activation of
cognition and emotion leads to neural integration. Increased
differentiation of individuals within a family will decrease the overall
rigidity of the system. This process also allows family members to
become more responsive to the needs of others and less reactive to their
own inner conflicts.

The first step in systems therapy is to educate the family about these
concepts and to explore the history of both sides of the family through
the past few generations. In the context of systems theory and family
history, the problems brought into relief often become more
understandable. Uncovering family secrets and reality testing around the
myths and projections of each family member allow for cortical
processing of primitive and unconscious defenses. The process of family
therapy involves a series of experiments with increasingly higher levels
of differentiation. Communication skills, assertiveness training, and
exercises in new forms of cooperation can all increase cortical
involvement with previously reflexive or regressive emotions and
behaviors. Often the person with the symptoms needs to take more
responsibility, while pathological caretakers must learn to accept
nurturance. Each member of the family needs to achieve a balance between
autonomy and interdependence. Ultimately, psychological, interpersonal,
and neural integration are different levels and manifestations of the
same process. Reichian and Gestalt Therapy I am not in this world to
live up to other people's expectations, nor do I feel that the world
must live up to mine. ---Fritz Perls Wilhelm Reich, one of Freud's early
disciples, felt that memory and personality are shaped and stored not
just in the brain but throughout the entire body. Because of this, Reich
not only paid careful attention to his clients' musculature, posture,
and breathing, but also encouraged them to express themselves physically
during analysis. By beating their fists, stomping their feet, and using
exaggerated breathing techniques, they attempted to release normally
inhibited emotions. Reich highlighted the importance of the therapist's
interpretation of the nonverbal messages of the body, making them
available for conscious consideration. His theories led to the
development of Rolfing (which uses deep body massage to evoke and
process memories) and Gestalt therapy (which focuses on drawing
attention to nonverbal aspects of communication and increased
self-awareness). Reich (1945) believed that the major focus of
psychotherapy should be the analysis of the character, something he saw
as similar to Freud's notion

of ego. While Freud focused on verbal communication, Reich's major
contribution was to draw more attention to the nonverbal and emotional
aspects of the therapeutic interaction. He contended that the problems
people bring to therapy are embedded in their character armor, shaped
during development as an adaptation against real or imagined danger.
Character armor forms as a result of misattunement, neglect, or trauma
at the hands of caretakers. This armor is preverbal and organizes during
the first years of life. According to Reich, early defenses take shape
at all levels of the nervous system, become encoded in our entire being,
and are, like the air we breathe, utterly invisible to us. The defenses
identified by Reich reflect emotional memories from early preverbal
experiences that are stored in sensory, motor, and emotional networks of
early memory. Because character armor is invisible to its owner, the
therapist's job is to make the client aware of its existence,
expression, and meaning. Gestalt therapy is a unique expression of
Reichian theory that is particularly relevant to the notion of neural
integration. Gestalt, a German word meaning "whole," reflects the
orientation of bringing together an awareness of conscious and
unconscious processes; in other words, seeing the whole picture. Gestalt
therapy's charismatic founder, Fritz Perls, used the term safe emergency
for the experience that psychotherapists strive to create in treatment
(Perls, Hefferline, & Goodman, 1951). A safe emergency is a challenge
for growth and integration in the context of guidance and support. It is
also a wonderful way to describe an important aspect of good parenting.
Therapists create this emergency by exposing clients to unintegrated and
dysregulating thoughts and feelings while offering them the tools and
nurturance with which to integrate their experiences. Safety is provided
in the form of a supportive and collaborative therapeutic relationship,
often in the context of a group. The emergency is created by an
unmasking of defenses, making unacceptable needs and emotions conscious,
and by bringing into awareness dissociated elements of consciousness.
The stories a patient tells about his or her problems are often seen, in
the Gestalt context, as self-deceptions. They serve to keep from
awareness those feelings that are relevant to healing but less
acceptable. Unconscious gestures, facial expressions, and movements are
first brought to awareness, then exaggerated, and finally given a voice
with the purpose of understanding and integrating experience. The
therapist points out

contradictions, such as making positive statements while shaking the
head "no," or smiling while talking about a painful experience. These
contradictions are explored as indications of internal conflicts to be
brought into awareness. Again, the focus is on bringing to conscious
(cortical) awareness the automatic, nonverbal, and unconscious processes
primarily organized in right hemisphere and subcortical neural networks.
Gestalt therapy emphasizes the identification and exploration of
projection, identifying it as an avenue for discovering aspects of the
self that have been difficult or impossible to accept. In the popular
"empty chair" technique, patients alternately play the role of different
parts of themselves to fully articulate the different sides of inner
conflicts. The Gestalt therapist believes that maximizing awareness of
all aspects of the self---including cognition, emotion, behavior, and
sensation---will result in increased maturation and psychological
health. This process depends on the integration of the neural networks
responsible for each of these functions. Common Factors My work as a
psychoanalyst is to help patients recover their lost wholeness and to
strengthen the psyche so it can resist future dismemberment. ---C. G.
Jung In reviewing these different psychotherapeutic modalities, a number
of principles emerge that unify the various therapeutic schools. The
first is that psychotherapy values openness, honesty, and trust. Each
form of psychotherapy creates an individualized experience designed to
examine conscious and unconscious beliefs and assumptions, expand
awareness and reality testing, and encourage the confrontation of
anxiety-provoking experiences. Each perspective explores behavior,
emotion, sensation, and cognition in an attempt to increase awareness of
previously unconscious or distorted material. The primary focus of
psychotherapy appears to be the integration of affect, in all its forms,
with conscious awareness, and cognition. Intellectual understanding of a
psychological problem in the absence of increased integration with
emotion, sensation, and behavior does not result in change. All forms of
treatment recognize the need for stress, from the

subtle disruption of defenses created by the compassion of Carl Rogers
to the exposure to feared stimuli in exposure therapies. There is a
recognition that the evocation of emotion coupled with conscious
awareness is most likely to result in symptom reduction and personal
growth. Whether it is called symptom relief, differentiation, ego
strength, or awareness, all forms of therapy are targeting dissociated
neural networks for integration. When theories of neuroscience and
psychotherapy are considered side by side, a number of working
hypotheses emerge. First, given that the human brain is a social organ,
safe and supportive relationships are the optimal environment for social
and emotional learning. Empathic attunement with the therapist provides
the context of nurturance in which growth and development occur. By
activating processes involved in secure attachment, empathic attunement
likely creates an optimal biochemical environment for neural plasticity.
Second, we appear to experience optimal development and integration in
the context of a mild to moderate level of arousal or what we might call
optimal stress. Suboptimal affect regulation during development can
result in symptoms, maladaptive defenses, and psychopathology. Optimal
stress will create the most favorable neurobiological environment for
neural plasticity and integration. Although stress appears important as
part of the activation of circuits involved with emotion, states of mild
to moderate arousal seem ideal for consolidation and integration. In
states of high arousal, sympathetic activation inhibits optimal cortical
processing and disrupts integration functions. The ebb and flow of
emotion over the course of therapy reflects the underlying neural
rhythms of growth and change. Psychodynamic therapies alternate
confrontations and interpretations with a supportive and soothing
interpersonal environment (Weiner, 1998). The systematic desensitization
of cognitive-behavioral therapy pairs exposure to feared stimuli with
psychoeducation and relaxation training in the presence of a coach and
ally (Wolpe, 1958). Bowen's family systems approach focuses on pairing
anxiety reduction with experiments in increasing levels of independent
and differentiated behavior (Bowen, 1978). All forms of successful
therapy strive to create safe emergencies in one form or another. A
third hypothesis is that the involvement of affect and cognition appears
necessary in the therapeutic process in order to create the context for
integration of neural circuits with a high vulnerability to
dissociation. It

has been said that, in psychotherapy, "understanding is the booby
prize." It is a hollow victory to end up with a psychological
explanation for problems that remain unchanged. On the other hand,
catharsis without cognition does not result in integration either. The
ability to tolerate and regulate affect creates the necessary condition
for the brain's continued growth throughout life. Increased integration
parallels an increased ability to experience and tolerate thoughts and
emotions previously inhibited, dissociated, or defended against. Affect
regulation may be the most important result of the psychotherapeutic
process across orientations, because it allows for a reconnection with
the naturally occurring salubrious experiences in life. Repeated
simultaneous activation of networks requiring integration with one
another most likely aids in their integration. Repetitive play in
children and the phrase "working through" in therapy best reflect this
process. This concept parallels the principle from neuroscience that
"neurons that fire together, wire together" (Hebb, 1949; Shatz, 1990).
The simultaneous activation of neural circuits allows them to stimulate
the development of connections within association areas to coordinate
and integrate their functioning. Fourth, the co-construction of
narratives between parent and child or therapist and client provides a
broad matrix supporting the integration of multiple neural networks.
Autobiographical memory creates stories of the self capable of
supporting affect regulation in the present and the maintenance of
homeostatic functions into the future. Memory, in this form, may
maximize neural network integration as it organizes vast amounts of
information across multiple processing tracks. Thus, language is an
important tool in both neurological and psychological development. Sam
and Jessica The deepest principle in human nature is the craving to be
appreciated. ---William James Being human mean communicating with
others. Humans have many channels of communication, including touch, eye
contact, tone of voice, and words. Through our interactions we have the
power to impact one another at every level. One of my most powerful
experiences of the truth of this fact

did not take place in a seminar or consulting room, but rather at the
home of a friend. I had volunteered to watch his two young children for
a few hours while he ran some errands. I had known Jessica and Sam, 4
and 6 years old, all their lives. I was someone on an outer ring of
their universe, an attractive combination of familiar and new, and
completely unprepared for what was about to happen. The minute their
father left, they shifted from low to medium to high gear and I found
myself in the midst of a frenzy of excitement. Toys began flying out of
closets and storage containers; games were begun and tossed aside;
videos were started, stopped, and replaced---a succession of Indian
princes, mermaids, lion kings, ladies, and tramps. After what felt like
hours, I glanced at my watch to find only 15 minutes had passed! Four
more hours at this pace? I wasn't sure I could survive. I kept trying to
refocus Sam and Jessica's activity, to no avail. At one point, as we
dashed from bedroom to den to living room, I sank to the floor in the
hall, and propped myself up against the wall. When they realized that I
wasn't right behind them, they ran back to find me. They stood panting,
one on either side of me, wondering what new game I had concocted. My
suggestion that we sit and talk for awhile passed unnoticed. After a few
seconds, Sam looked at his sister and yelled, "Show Lou how you burp
your dolly!" Both let out a scream and Jessica soon returned with an
adorable squishy doll. As I reached for the doll to hold and admire it,
Jessica threw the doll on the floor face first and drove her fists into
its back. As Jessica and Sam took turns crushing the doll into the
carpet, I watched in horror, completely identifying with the doll. I had
to hold back my urge to save the poor thing from her vicious attackers.
I quickly reminded myself that I was feeling sorry for a ball of cotton
and that I should turn my attention back to the children. I also
realized that rescuing the doll would be scolding Sam and Jessica for
their behavior, which I did not want to do. I struggled to make sense of
what was happening and asked myself if there might be some symbolic
message in the way they were treating this doll. Jessica and Sam had
experienced a great deal of stress in their brief lives in the forms of
severe physical illness, surgery, drug addiction in the family, and an
understandably overwhelmed support system. The frantic activity I was
witnessing may have reflected the accumulated anxiety from all they had
gone through, mixed with normal

childhood exuberance. But how might knowing this be helpful to these two
beautiful children? As I reflected on these things I was hit by the
notion that perhaps the doll represented both Sam and Jessica. This doll
needed to be burped. It needed the help of an adult to alleviate its
discomfort and regain a sense of comfort and equilibrium. Perhaps Sam
and Jessica were showing me that when they needed to be comforted, they
were met with more pain, or, at the very least, insufficient
understanding and warmth. Might their behavior be a message? "Please, we
need nurturance and healing!" Their world seemed chaotic and unsafe, a
whirlwind; these were the same feelings they had created within me
during the last half hour. Was their behavior a form of communication?
They had each taken a number of turns "burping" the doll and I suspected
that their attention would soon turn to me. What to do or say? I didn't
want to burp the baby their way, and my thoughts about what was
happening would be meaningless. I could feel my anxiety growing when
finally, they both turned to me and cried in unison: "Your turn!" I
hesitated. The chant of "Burp the baby, burp the baby" began to rise. I
looked at both of them and said, "I know another way to burp a baby.
Here's how my mom burped me." A cheer went up. I suspect they assumed
that I was going to set the doll on fire or put it in the microwave. I
gently picked up the doll and brought it to my left shoulder. Rubbing
its back in a circular motion using my right hand, looking down at it
with tenderness, I quietly said, "This will make you feel better, little
one." A silence fell over the hallway. I looked up to find Jessica and
Sam transfixed, as if hypnotized. Their eyes followed the slow circles
of my hand, heads tilted like puppies. Their bodies relaxed, their hands
limp at their sides, calm for the first time. After following the
movement of my hand for about 30 seconds, Jessica looked up at me and
softly asked, "Can I have a turn?" "Of course you can," I told her. At
first I thought she meant that she wanted a turn burping the baby. But
then carefully, almost respectfully, she took the doll from me and
placed it on the floor with its back against the wall. She stepped over
to me, climbed over my crossed legs and put her head on my shoulder
where the doll's head had been. She turned to me and almost inaudibly
said, "I'm ready now." As I rubbed Jessica's back, I felt her growing
more and more limp as she melted into my shoulder and chest. I half
expected Sam to tear

her off, climb on himself, and turn it into a wrestling match. When I
looked over to him, I could see that he was in the same posture and
state of mind he had been in watching me burp the doll. He eventually
looked up at me and asked, "Can I have a turn?" Before I could answer,
Jessica lifted her head slightly and told him, "In a minute." After a
while, she gave up her spot on my shoulder and Sam had his turn being
"burped." It felt wonderful to hold them in this way and give them
something they seemed to need so badly. After a few turns for each of
them, we went into the den, curled up on the sofa, one of them under
each of my arms, and watched a movie. Actually, I watched the
movie---they dozed off after only a few minutes. While my eyes followed
the frenetic animation on the screen, my breathing paced theirs and I
shared the peace they seemed to be feeling. I marveled at how they
managed to communicate their pain and confusion by creating these same
feelings in me. Emotion is truly contagious and a powerful source of
human connection. By having them set the initial pace of our play, I
told them I respected their way of coping. Through the use of the doll,
they communicated that when they needed soothing their anxiety was often
met with more of the same. When I burped their doll in a caring and
loving way, I showed them that I was capable of soothing them if they
were feeling bad. By asking me to burp them, they told me I was trusted.
In falling asleep, they said, "We feel safe and we know you will watch
over us while we rest." While none of this was spoken, the communication
was clear. Our interactions with the doll changed Sam and Jessica's
state of mind and body as well as my own. I believe that it not only
impacted their attitudes and behaviors that afternoon, but may have also
changed their brains in some small but perhaps permanent way. I could
see this reflected in their faces and hear it in the tone of their
voices; something fundamental had changed that affected their entire
beings. I provided them with a metaphor through which they could
reorganize their experience, have their needs met, and regulate their
emotions. Together, the three of us coconstructed a new narrative for
them to use as a way of soothing themselves and each other. Were this
process to be repeated enough times, their brains could reorganize
around this metaphor of nurturance and holding and enhance communication
between networks of cognitive and emotional processing.

Perhaps Sam and Jessica could internalize a model of self-holding and
nurturance that would help them navigate future challenges. This kind of
interaction is at the heart of all forms of psychotherapy, regardless of
philosophy or technique. All forms of therapy have their own versions of
integrative metaphors, serving to reorganize neural networks and alter
human experience, hopefully, for the better. Summary In this chapter we
have discussed some of the basic principles connecting the historical
and conceptual connections between psychotherapy and neuroscience. Four
common factors related to the nature of social relationships, optimal
stress, the activation of affect and cognition, and the co-construction
of narratives emerge from the review. In the chapters to come, we will
explore the components and organizing principles of the nervous system.
These basic concepts will help us understand the neural mechanisms of
the building and rebuilding of the brain. OceanofPDF.com

Part II.

How the Brain Works: The Legacy of Evolution

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 4

The Human Nervous System: From Neurons to Neural Networks All functions
of mind reflect functions of brain. ---Eric Kandel Studying the human
brain is a daunting task. In fact, the human brain is so vastly complex
that it would take tens of thousands of pages to do justice to what is
known about its structure and function. But how much do we really need
to know about the brain to help us in our work as therapists? My belief
is that a basic understanding of the nervous system, without getting
lost in the details, would be very helpful. With this as our goal, we
will move through a thumbnail sketch of the basic structures, functions,
and development of the nervous system. Keep in mind that this is a
skewed look at the human nervous system biased toward those structures,
processes, and theories that will be relevant to the chapters to come.
Neurons It is impossible, in principle, to explain any pattern by
invoking a single quantity. ---Gregory Bateson The basic unit of the
nervous system is the neuron, which receives and transmits signals via
chemical transmission and electrical impulses. There are an estimated
100 billion neurons in the brain, with between 10 and 100,000 synaptic
connections each, creating limitless networking possibilities (Nolte,
2008; Post & Weiss, 1997). Neurons have fibers called axons covered with
myelin, an insulator that enhances the efficiency of

communication. Because neurons myelinate as they develop, one way of
measuring the maturity of a neural network is to measure its degree of
myelinization. Multiple sclerosis---a disease that breaks down myelin---
results in a decrease in the efficiency of neural communication,
negatively impacting cognition, affect, and movement (Hurley, Taber,
Zhang, & Hayman, 1999). The white matter of the brain is white because
myelin is white (or at least light in color). Gray matter consists
primarily of neural cell bodies. When a neuron fires, information is
carried via an electrical charge that travels down the length of its
axon. Neurons communicate with one another across synapses (the spaces
between neurons) via chemical messengers called neurotransmitters. The
combination of these two complementary processes creates the brain's
electrochemical system. Many neurons develop elaborate branches, called
dendrites, which form synaptic connections with thousands of dendrites
from other neurons. The relationships formed among these dendrites
organize the complex networking of the nervous system. Glia Complex,
statistically improbable things are by their nature more difficult to
explain than simple, statistically probable things. ---Richard Dawkins
Although the focus of neuroscience research is usually on neurons, they
make up only half the volume of the cerebral cortex. The other half of
our brain is made up of approximately one trillion cells known as glia.
One reason we know so much more about neurons is that they are
approximately 10 times larger than glial cells. It has long been known
that glia play an important supportive role in the construction,
organization, and maintenance of neural systems. More recently, it has
become apparent that they are also involved in neural network
communication and plasticity (Allen & Barres, 2005; Pfrieger & Barres,
1996; Sontheimer, 1995; Vernadakis, 1996). Neural plasticity refers to
the ability of neurons to change the way they are shaped and relate to
one another as the brain adapts to the environment through time.

Astrocytes, the most abundant kind of glia, have been shown to
participate in the regulation of synaptic transmission and to be
involved in the coordination and synchronization of synaptic activity
(Fellin, Pascual, & Haydon, 2006; Newman, 1982). There now appears to be
glial as well as neural transmission. There is also the distinct
possibility that astrocytes both shape and modulate synapses (Halassa,
Fellin, & Hayden, 2007). Through evolution, the ratio of glial cells to
neurons has steadily increased, leading some to believe that our
expanding cognitive sophistication is, in part, related to the
participation of astrocytes in information processing (Nedergaard,
Ransom, & Goldman, 2003; Oberheim, Wang, Goldman, & Nedergaard, 2006).
We will revisit this in a later chapter when we discuss Einstein's glial
cells and his exceptional imaginal abilities. Neurogenesis What we teach
today is part biology and part history...but we don't always know where
one ends and the other begins. ---J. T. Bonner Neurogenesis, the birth
of new neurons via cell division, occurs in the lower regions of the
ventricles, the fluid-filled cavities within our brains. Some fish and
amphibians, which demonstrate ongoing neurogenesis, possess nervous
systems that continue to grow in size throughout life (Fine, 1989).
During evolution, it appears that primates may have traded much of their
capacity for neurogenesis to continue building existing neural networks
in order to retain past learning and develop expert knowledge. In other
words, if instead of being replaced, neurons are retained and
continually modified through the branching of their dendrites in
reaction to new experience, more refined learning may result (Purves &
Voyvodic, 1987). Neurons do not appear to have a life span, but die off
either as a function of normal apoptosis or because their biochemical
environment becomes inhospitable. High levels of cortisol, a lack of
blood flow, or the buildup of harmful free radicals can all lead to
neuronal death. The traditional wisdom concerning neurogenesis in
vertebrates, and especially primates, has been that new neurons are no
longer created after early development (Michel & Moore, 1995; Rakic,
1985). Despite considerable evidence to the contrary, this dogma held
sway through most

of the 20th century. However, research continues to demonstrate that new
neurons are formed in the brains of adult birds (Nottebohm, 1981), tree
shrews (Gould et al., 1997), primates (Gould, Reeves, Fallah, et al.,
1999), and humans (Gould, Reeves, Graziano, et al., 1999). Further,
neurogenesis is regulated by environmental factors and experiences such
as stress and social interactions (Fowler, Liu, Ouimet, & Wang, 2002).
Humans have maintained the ability to create neurons in areas involved
with new learning, such as the hippocampus, the amygdala, and the
cerebral cortex (Eriksson et al., 1998; Gould, 2007; Gross, 2000). The
importance of these discoveries and the abandonment of the old dogma
cannot be underestimated. Nobel-prize-winning neuroscientist Eric Kandel
referred to Nottebohm's discovery of seasonal neurogenesis in birds as
having resulted in one of the great paradigm shifts in modern biology
(Specter, 2001). Neural Systems I believe in God, only I spell it
Nature. ---Frank Lloyd Wright As the brain develops and matures, neurons
organize in more and more complex neural networks tailored to carry out
the numerous functions of the nervous system. The two most basic
divisions of the nervous system are the central nervous system (CNS) and
the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The CNS includes the brain and
spinal cord, whereas the PNS is comprised of the autonomic nervous
system and the somatic nervous system. The autonomic and somatic nervous
systems are involved in the communication between the CNS and the sense
organs, glands, and the body (including the heart, intestines, and
lungs). The autonomic nervous system has two branches, called the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The sympathetic system
controls the activation of the nervous system in response to a threat or
other form of motivation. The parasympathetic system balances the
sympathetic system by fostering conservation of bodily energy,
immunological functions, and repair of damaged systems. A third system
referred to as the smart vagus operates in parallel to the
parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system and is dedicated
to fine-tuning bodily reactions, especially in social situations
(Porges, 2007). These three systems will be of particular interest

in later chapters, when we discuss attachment and the effects of stress
and trauma. Although MacLean's formulation of the triune brain is seen
as too simplistic by most neuroscientists, many still recognize the
tripartite division of the brain into the cerebral cortex, the limbic
system, and the brainstem. Each layer is thought of as having different
responsibilities. The brainstem---the inner core of the brain---oversees
the body's internal milieu by regulating temperature, heart rate, and
basic reflexes such as blood flow and respiration. The structure and
functions of the brainstem were shaped during our genetic history and
are fully formed and functional at birth. The reflexes we see in the
newborn who grasps her mother, suckles her breast, and knows to hold her
breath when put under water are genetic memories retained from our
tree-dwelling ancestors. The outer layer of the brain, the cerebral
cortex, is first organized by, and then comes to organize, our
experiences and how we interact with the world. As we grow, the cortex
allows us to form ideas and mental representations of ourselves, other
people, and the environment. Distinct from the brainstem, the cortex is
experience dependent, which means that it is shaped through countless
interactions with our social and physical worlds. In this way we grow to
adapt to the particular niche into which we are born. The two halves of
the cerebral cortex have gradually differentiated during primate
evolution to the point where each has developed areas of specialization,
referred to as lateral dominance or specialization. Language is the
best-understood example of lateral specialization. The two cerebral
hemispheres communicate with each other primarily via the corpus
callosum, which consists of long neural fibers that connect the two.
Although the corpus callosum is the largest and most efficient mode of
communication between the hemispheres in adults, there are a number of
smaller cortical and subcortical interconnections between the two halves
of the brain (Myers & Sperry, 1985; Sergent, 1986, 1990). The cortex has
been subdivided by neuroanatomists into four lobes: frontal, temporal,
parietal, and occipital (Figure 4.1). Each is represented on both sides
of the brain and specializes in certain functions: the occipital cortex
comprises the areas for visual processing; the temporal cortex for
auditory processing, receptive language, and memory functions; the
parietal cortex for linking the senses with motor abilities and the
creation of

the experience of a sense of our body in space; and the frontal cortex
for motor behavior, expressive language, executive functioning, abstract
reasoning, and directed attention. The term prefrontal cortex is often
used to refer to the foremost portion of the frontal lobe. Two
additional cortical lobes, the cingulate and insula cortices, are
gaining increasing recognition as distinct and important areas of the
cortical-subcortical interface. They are involved in the integration of
inner and outer experience, linking the rest of the cortex with somatic
and emotional experience. Between the brainstem and the cortex lies a
region referred to as the limbic system, which is involved with
learning, motivation, memory, and emotion. Because this book focuses on
development and psychotherapy, you will notice repeated references to
two limbic structures. The first is the amygdala, a key component in
neural networks involved in attachment as well as the appraisal and
expression of emotion throughout life (Cheng, Knight, Smith, &
Helmstetter, 2006; Phelps, 2006; Strange & Dolan, 2004). The other is
the hippocampus, which organizes explicit memory and the contextual
modulation of emotion in collaboration with the cerebral cortex (Ji &
Maren, 2007). Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators Brains exist because
the distribution of resources necessary for survival and the hazards
that threaten survival vary in space and time. ---John Allman Recall
that, within the nervous system, neurons communicate with each other via
chemical messengers called neurotransmitters. Different neural networks
tend to utilize different sets of neurotransmitters, which is why
certain psychotropic medications impact different symptoms. Chemicals
that serve as neurotransmitters include monoamines, neuropeptides, and
amino acids. Neuromodulators (e.g., the hormones testosterone, estrogen,
cortisol, and other steroids) regulate the effects of the
neurotransmitters on receptor neurons. Amino acids are the simplest and
most prevalent neuromodulators. Glutamate is the major excitatory amino
acid in the brain

and central to neural plasticity and new learning (Cowan & Kandel, 2001;
Malenka & Siegelbaum, 2001). Interactions with one of its primary
receptors, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), regulates long-term potentiation
and long-term depression, thereby shaping the relationship between
neurons (Liu et al., 2004; Massey et al., 2004; Zhao et al., 2005). The
monoamines---including dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin ---play a
major role in the regulation of cognitive and emotional processing
(Ansorge, Zhou, Lira, Hen, & Gingrich, 2004). All three are produced in
different areas of the brainstem and are carried upward via ascending
neural networks to the cortex. Dopamine, produced in the substantia
nigra and other areas of the brainstem, is a key neurotransmitter in
motor activity and reward reinforcement. Too much dopamine can result in
mood changes, increased motor behavior, and disturbed frontal lobe
functioning, which, in turn, can cause depression, memory impairment,
and apathy. Parkinson's disease results from damage to the substantia
nigra and a consequent loss of dopamine. Many believe that schizophrenia
is caused by too much dopamine, which overloads sensory processing
capabilities and creates hallucinations and delusions. Norepinephrine,
produced in the locus coeruleus and other brain regions, is a key
component of the emergency system of the brain and is especially
relevant for understanding stress and trauma. High levels result in
anxiety, vigilance, symptoms of panic, and a fight-flight response.
Norepinephrine also serves to enhance memory for stressful and traumatic
events. Serotonin, generated in the raphe nucleus, is distributed widely
throughout the brain and plays a role in arousal, the sleep--wake cycle,
and the mediation of mood and emotion (Fisher et al., 2006). Popular
antidepressant medications such as Prozac and Paxil cause higher levels
of available serotonin in the synapses and higher levels of neurogenesis
(Encinas, Vaahtokari, & Enikolopov, 2006). The group of
neurotransmitters known as neuropeptides includes endorphins,
enkephalins, oxytocin, vasopressin, and neuropeptide-Y. These compounds
work together with neuromodulators to regulate pain, pleasure, and
reward systems. The endorphins tend to modulate the activity of
monoamines, making them highly relevant for understanding psychiatric
illnesses. Endogenous endorphins (endorphins produced by the body) serve
as an analgesic in states of physical pain. They are also involved with
dissociation and self-abusive behavior, as we will discuss in a later
chapter

on trauma. The relationship between the monoamines and neuropeptides is
vitally important to the growth and organization of the brain.
Glucocorticoids/Cortisol We're lousy at recognizing when our normal
coping mechanisms aren't working. Our response is usually to do it five
times more, instead of thinking; maybe it's time to try something new.
---Robert Sapolsky Cortisol, the most important glucocorticoid, is often
referred to as the "stress hormone." It is produced in the adrenal
glands in response to a wide variety of everyday challenges. The term
glucocorticoid comes from the fact that it was first recognized for its
role in glucose metabolism. With further study, however, many more
functions of cortisol were uncovered. Glucocorticoid receptors (GRs) are
found in almost all of the tissues of our bodies. At normal levels and
over short periods, cortisol enhances memory, mobilizes energy, and
helps to restore homeostasis after stressful situations. Glucocorticoids
stimulate gluconeogenesis and the breakdown of lipids and proteins to
make energy available to us for emergencies. If we have to fight or
flee, we are going to need energy. Cortisol evolved to be useful for
periods of brief stress which, when resolved, allow GRs to signal the
adrenal glands to shut down production. Prolonged cortisol release, on
the other hand, can weaken the immune system by preventing T-Cell
proliferation. In fact, the synthetic form of cortisol is called
hydrocortisone and is used to treat inflammation and allergies by
inhibiting natural immunological responses. Sustained high levels of
cortisol disrupt protein synthesis, halt neural growth, and disturb the
sodium-potassium balance to the point of neural death. Early and
prolonged stress has been correlated with memory deficits, problems with
affect regulation, and reduction of volume in brain regions including
the hippocampus and amygdala (Buchanan, Tranel, & Adolphs, 2006). It is
believed that sustained high levels of glucocorticoids early in life can
have a negative impact on brain development and make a child more
vulnerable to subsequent stress. It has been shown that maternal
behavior in rats stimulates the development of GRs in the brains of
their pups. Greater density of GRs in the brain results in enhanced
feedback to the adrenal

glands, which serves to shut down cortisol production. This is one of
the underlying neurobiological correlates associating maternal attention
with resilience and positive coping later in life. The production and
availability of these neurochemicals shape all of our experience, from
bonding and affect regulation to cognitive processing and our sense of
well-being. Regulation of these neurochemicals to control psychiatric
symptomatology is the focus of the field of psychopharmacology (Gitlin,
2007; Stahl, 2008). Genetics and Epigenetics I am convinced that it will
not be long before the whole world acknowledges the results of my work.
---Gregor Mendel At the forefront of the science of genetics is Abbot
Gregor Mendel, who, in the garden of his ancient abbey, discovered many
of the principles of inheritance that still hold true. It turns out that
his discoveries with pea plants apply to animals and humans because the
underlying mechanisms of heredity are similar for all complex life
forms. As you probably remember, his findings included dominant and
recessive genes and the principles of segregation and independent
assortment. With the benefits of modern technology, Mendel's
observations of the natural world were later understood to be the
effects of template genetics, or the way in which genes and chromosomes
combine to pass along traits from one generation to the next. We now
know that our genetic information is coded in four amino acid bases
(adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine) that flow from DNA to
messenger RNA (mRNA) to protein. Although this understanding was a huge
leap forward in our knowledge of the underlying processes of genetic
transmission, it accounts for only about 2% of genetic expression. The
scientific term for the other 98% of genetic material was "junk," once
thought to be accumulated debris of natural selection. It turns out,
however, that some of this junk plays an important role in guiding
introns and exons, which help determine whether specific elements of the
genetic code get expressed or lie dormant. Biologist C. H. Waddington
coined the term epigenetics by combining the words genetics and epi,
Greek for over or above. Epigenesis describes the transformation of
cells from their original undifferentiated state during

embryonic development into a specific type of cell. Thus, epigenetics is
the study of how our genotype is orchestrated into our phenotype.
Understanding the elements of epigenetics may help us grasp why
identical twins with the same genes may differ in phenotype, that is,
why one becomes schizophrenic and the other does not. This gets us back
to the old nature-nurture debate and the question: What do we inherit,
and what do we learn from experience? Our best guess is that almost
everything involves an interaction between the two. While we inherit a
template of genetic material (genotype), what gets expressed (phenotype)
is guided by noncoded genetic information that is experience dependent.
Experience can include anything from toxic exposure to a good education;
high levels of sustained stress to a warm and loving environment; feast
to famine. Thus, many more genes are involved with the regulation of
what is expressed than with the direct synthesis of protein. So while
template genetics may guide the early formation of the brain during
gestation, the regulation of gene expression directs its long-term
development in reaction to ongoing adaptation to the social and physical
worlds. Epigenetics is a term used to describe this change in the
phenotypic expression of genes in the absence of a change in the DNA
template. An example of this process of particular relevance to
emotional development and psychotherapy is the impact of early stress on
the adult brain. Meaney and his colleagues (1991) believe that early
environmental programming of neural systems has a profound and
long-lasting effect on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis,
which regulates an individual's responsivity to stress. Research with
rats has demonstrated that the stress of early maternal deprivation
downregulates the degree of neurogenesis and the response to stress
during adulthood (Mirescu, Peters, & Gould, 2004; Karten, Olariu, &
Cameron, 2005). Just as important for us, these processes are reversible
later in life. As therapists, we attempt to reprogram these neural
systems via a supportive relationship and the techniques we bring to
bear during treatment. In other words, we are using epigenetics to
change the brain in ways that enhance mental and physical well-being.
Views of the Brain

When considering the abilities and complexities of the brain, one is
struck by the incredible efficiency and splendor expressed in gray and
white matter. ---Julian Paul Keenan Throughout most of the history of
neurology, the human brain was only examined after injury or death. The
location of brain damage during autopsy was linked to the nature and
severity of the patient's clinical symptoms during life. Brain
development was studied by examining and comparing the brains of humans
and animals at different ages. These brains were compared for size; the
number of neurons, synapses, and dendrites; the degree of myelinization;
and other aspects of neural maturation. Newer techniques allow us to
examine brain structure in living subjects. Through the use of
computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), we
are able to see two-and three-dimensional pictures of the living brain.
Both of these techniques provide a series of cross-sectional images of
the brain through its many layers. CT scans do this via multiple X-rays.
MRI scans utilize radio waves and a magnetic field to study the magnetic
resonance of hydrogen molecules in the water present in different brain
structures. In determining brain--behavior relationships, these measures
need to be evaluated on the basis of whether they are causes or
correlates of the disorder being studied (Davidson, 1999). In their
present practical applications, radiologists learn to read these images
for the presence and locations of tumors or lesions in order to assist
surgeons in their work. These scans have become an indispensable tool in
neurology. The functioning of the brain can also be measured in many
ways. Clinical and mental status exams, tests of strength and reflexes,
and neuropsychological assessment all require a patient to perform
physical or mental operations that are tied to known neurobiological
systems. These clinical tests are supplemented by a number of laboratory
tests that measure different aspects of brain functioning. The
electroencephalograph (EEG) measures patterns of electrical activity
throughout the cortex. There are characteristic brainwave patterns in
different states of arousal and stages of sleep. Epilepsy or the
presence of tumors will demonstrate characteristic alterations of normal
electrical functioning, allowing EEGs to be used as diagnostic tools.
EEGs can also be used to measure brain development, because neural
network organization is characterized by the replacement of

local erratic discharges with more widespread and constant wave patterns
(Barry et al., 2004; Field & Diego, 2008b; Forbes et al., 2008). The
most exciting new tools in neuroscience are the various brainscanning
techniques providing us with a window to the brain in action. Positron
emission tomography, single photon emission tomography, and functional
magnetic resonance imaging measure changes in blood flow, oxygen
metabolism, and glucose utilization, which tell us about the relative
activity of different regions of the brain. Using these techniques,
neuroscientists can now explore complex activation--deactivation
patterns of brain activity in subjects performing a wide range of
cognitive, emotional, and behavioral tasks (Drevets, 1998). Most of
these newer scanning techniques are still somewhat experimental, and
methodological standards regarding their use and interpretation continue
to evolve. These methods, and those yet to be developed, will vastly
enhance our understanding of the brain. As they grow increasingly more
accurate and specific, so too will our knowledge of neural network
functioning. Brain Development and Neural Plasticity Swiftly the brain
becomes an enchanted loom, where millions of flashing shuttles weave a
dissolving pattern---always a meaningful pattern---though never an
abiding one ---Sir Charles Sherrington Experience sculpts the brain
through selective excitation of neurons and the resultant shaping of
neural networks. Paradoxically, the number of neurons decreases with age
while the size of the brain increases. The surviving neurons continue to
grow from what look like small sprouts into microscopic oak trees. This
process of growth and connectivity is sometimes referred to as
arborization. In order for a neuron to survive and grow, it must wire
with other neurons in increasingly complex interconnections. Just as we
survive and thrive through our relationships with others, neurons
survive and grow as a function of how "well connected" they are. Through
what appears to be a competitive process referred to as neural
Darwinism, cells struggle for connectivity with other cells in the
creation of neural networks (Edelman, 1987). Cells connect and learning
occurs through changes of synaptic

strength between neurons in response to stimulation. Repeated firing of
two adjacent neurons results in metabolic changes in both cells, which
provides an increased efficiency in their joint activation. In this
process, called longterm potentiation (LTP) or Hebbian learning,
excitation between cells is prolonged, allowing them to become
synchronized in their firing patterns and joint effectiveness (Hebb,
1949). LTP is believed to be a fundamental principle of neuroplastic
learning. Underlying LTP is the constant reaching out of small portions
of the dendrites in an attempt to connect with adjacent neurons. When
these connections are made, neurons synthesize new protein to build more
permanent bridges between them. Through LTP, cell assemblies organize
into functional neural networks that are stimulated through
trial-and-error learning. This is only one small piece of a vastly
complex set of interactions involving the connection, timing, and
organization of firing within and between billions of interconnected
neurons in the CNS (Malekna & Siegelbaum, 2001). Early in development,
there is an initial overproduction of neurons that gradually decreases
through the process of pruning, or apoptosis. Neural Darwinism applies
to both the survival of neurons and the synaptic connections among them.
Synapses that are formed may be subsequently eliminated if they become
inactivated or inefficient (Purves & Lichtman, 1980). In fact,
elimination of synaptic connections in the cortex continues shaping
neural circuitry through adolescence and into adulthood (Cozolino, 2008;
Huttenlocher, 1994). In contrast to the brainstem and limbic system, the
cortex is immature at birth and continues to develop throughout
adulthood. Because of this developmental timing, brainstem reflexes
organize much of the infant's early behaviors and the behavior of a
newborn is dominated by subcortical activity. The neonate will orient to
the mother's smell, seek the nipple, gaze into her eyes, and grasp her
hair. A good example of a brainstem reflex is the Moro reflex, by which
the infant reaches out with open hands and legs extended, putting the
infant into a position conducive to grasping and holding (Eliot, 1999).
The child's eyes reflexively orient to the mother's eyes and face and a
baby's first smiles are controlled by brainstem reflexes to attract
caretakers. In fact, children born with a genetic malformation that
results in having only a brainstem are still able to smile
(Herschkowitz, Kegan, & Zilles, 1997). These reflexes enhance physical
survival and jump

start the attachment process by connecting parent and child, while
enhancing their bond. As anyone who has been pregnant can tell you,
babies begin to engage in spontaneous activity of the arms and hands
well before birth. While the baby is practicing using its arms and legs,
parents-to-be grow increasingly excited as these signs of activity grow
in frequency and strength. After birth, newborns continue to move all
parts of their bodies, allowing them to discover their hands and feet as
they pass in front of their faces. Although these movements may look
random, they are the brain's best guess at which movements will
eventually be needed. These reflexive movements jump start the
organization of motor networks to build the skills the child will need
later on (Katz & Shatz, 1996). Through months and years of
trial-and-error learning, these best guesses become shaped into
purposeful and intentional behaviors that are reflected in the
organization of underlying neural networks (Shatz, 1990). As sensory
systems develop, they provide increasingly precise input to guide neural
network formation for more complex patterns of behavior. As positive and
negative values are connected with certain perceptions and movements---
such as the appearance of the mother and reaching out to her---emotional
networks will integrate with sensory and motor systems. In the
development of these and other systems, we find the sequential
activation of reflexive and spontaneous processes priming neural
development, which comes to be shaped by ongoing experience. Cortical
Inhibition and Conscious Control He who conquers others is strong; he
who conquers himself is mighty. ---Lao-Tzu The gradual attenuation of
neonatal reflexes and spontaneous behavior corresponds with rising
levels of cortical activity and involvement in behavior. As the cortex
develops, vast numbers of top-down neural networks connect it with
subcortical areas. These top-down networks provide the pathways for
inhibiting reflexes and bringing the body and emotions under increasing
cortical control. An example of this is the development of the fine
motor movements between the thumb and

forefinger that are required to hold a spoon. Primitive grasping
reflexes allow only for the spoon to be held in a tight fist, rendering
it useless as a tool. The developing cortex enables the grasping reflex
to be inhibited, while cortical networks dedicated to finger sensitivity
and hand--eye coordination mature. Thus, a vital aspect of the
development of the cortex is inhibitory---first of reflexes, later of
spontaneous movements and even later of emotions and inappropriate
social behavior. Only through repeated trial-and-error learning are
early clumsy movements slowly shaped into functional skills. Children
and their brains intuitively know this and will resist being held back
or helped too much. When we attempt to help, a child's impatient protest
of "Let me do it!" reflects instinctual wisdom of the importance of
trial-and-error learning in the growth of neural networks. This makes
for many years of messes and boo-boos. Another good example of the
process of brain maturation is our ability to swim. The newborn's
brainstem reflex to hold its breath and paddle when dropped into water
is lost (inhibited by higher brain circuitry) just weeks after birth.
The skills involved with swimming need to be relearned as cortically
organized skills in years to come. Motor networks need to be taught body
movements, as breathing becomes timed and synchronized with each stroke.
Cortical inhibition and descending control are also central to affect
regulation. The rapidly changing and overwhelming emotions displayed by
very young children reflect this lack of control. As the middle portions
of the frontal cortex expand and extend their fibers down into the
limbic system and brainstem, children gradually gain increasing capacity
to regulate their emotions and find ways to gain soothing, first through
others, and eventually by themselves. When these systems are damaged or
developmentally delayed, we witness symptoms related to deficits in
attention, emotional regulation, and impulse control. We see the changes
in motor control and posture as a child moves from being able to sit
upright without help at about 6 months, to crawling at about 9 months,
and then to walking without help by about 1 year. At 2 years, a child
will walk up and down stairs; by 3 she can peddle a tricycle. As these
skills are shaped, so too are the brain systems dedicated to balance,
motor control, visual--spatial coordination, learning, and motivation
that control them. The growth, development, and integration of neural
networks continue to be sculpted by environmental demands. In turn,
neuronal

sculpting is reflected in increasingly complex patterns of behavior and
inner experience. Sensitive Periods The principal activities of brains
are making changes in themselves. ---Marvin L. Minsky The brain
continues to grow as long as we continue to learn, essentially until the
day we die. Early brain development is highlighted by periods of
exuberant neural growth and connectivity called sensitive periods
triggered by the interaction of genes and experience. These sensitive
periods are times of rapid learning during which thousands of synaptic
connections are made each second (Greenough, 1987; ten Cate, 1989). The
timing of sensitive periods varies across neural systems, which is why
different abilities appear at different ages. The most widely recognized
sensitive period is the development of language. At 24 months, an
average child understands and uses about 50 words; this increases to
1,000 words by 36 months (Dunbar, 1996). The extent of neural growth and
learning during sensitive periods results in early experience having a
disproportionate impact on our brains, minds, and experiences. As we
learn of the brain's ability to create new neurons and retain plasticity
throughout life, the importance of sensitive periods takes on new
meaning. The question for therapists is: How amenable are these
established structures to modification? This is a topic we will come
back to again and again in later chapters. The growth of neurons and the
development of increasingly complex neural networks require large
amounts of energy. Patterns of increasing glucose metabolism during the
first year of life proceed in phylogenic order, meaning that the
development of more primitive brain structures precedes those which
evolve later (Chugani, 1998; Chugani & Phelps, 1991). Early sensitive
periods account for the higher level of metabolism in the brains of
infants compared to adults. Ever notice how warm a baby's head is? It
has been estimated that in rats' brains, 250,000 synaptic connections
are formed every second during the first month after birth (Schuz,
1978). Just imagine what the number must be for humans.

Networks dedicated to individual senses develop before the association
areas that connect them to one another (Chugani, Phelps, & Mazziotta,
1987). The growth and coordination of the different senses parallel what
we also witness in such behavioral changes as hand--eye coordination and
the ability to inhibit incorrect movements (Bell & Fox, 1992; Fischer,
1987). As the cerebral cortex matures, a child at 8 months is able to
distinguish faces and compare them to his or her memory of other faces.
It is around this period that stranger anxiety and separation anxiety
develop. As the brain matures, we witness increasing cortical activation
and the establishment of more efficient neural circuitry firing in
increasingly synchronous patterns. Although both the left and right
cerebral hemispheres are developing at very high rates during the early
years of life, the right hemisphere appears to have a relatively higher
rate of activity and growth during the earliest years (Chiron et al.,
1997). During this time, vital learning in the areas of attachment,
emotional regulation, and self-esteem are organized in neural networks
biased toward the right hemisphere. Somewhere around age 3, this pattern
of asymmetrical growth shifts to the left hemisphere. Summary The
maturation and sculpting of so much of the cortex after birth allows for
highly specific environmental adaptations. The caretaker relationship is
the primary means by which physical and cultural environments are
translated to infants. It is within the context of these close
relationships that networks dedicated to feelings of safety and danger,
attachment, and the core sense of self are shaped. The first few years
of life appear to be a particularly sensitive period for the formation
of these networks. It may be precisely because there is so much neural
growth and organization during sensitive periods that early
interpersonal experiences may be far more influential than are those
occurring later. The fact that they are preconscious and nonverbal makes
them difficult to discover and more resistant to change. Because these
neural networks are sculpted during early interactions, we emerge into
self-awareness preprogrammed by unconsciously organized hidden layers of
neural processing. The structure of these neural networks organizes core
structures of our experience of self.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 5

Multiple Memory Systems in Psychotherapy To "do memory" is essentially
to engage in a cultural practice. ---Kenneth Gergen The process of
psychotherapy is totally dependent upon memory. From what we know of
clients' past and current lives, to their ability to bring the lessons
of therapy into practice, everything depends on their ability to learn
and remember. Yet, despite its central role in our work, the majority of
clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, family therapists, and social
workers receive little or no training in the hows and whys of memory. In
this chapter we explore various aspects of memory and their role in both
mental illnesses and psychotherapy. Psychotherapists have traditionally
divided memory into the broad categories of conscious, preconscious, and
unconscious. Conscious memory is expressed in recollections of the past,
the content of previous therapy sessions, and reports of current
day-to-day life. The preconscious contains memories that are not the
focus of current attention but which can easily be brought into
conscious awareness with a minimum of difficulty. Unconscious memory
unavailable to conscious consideration can manifest in behaviors,
attitudes, and feelings as well as in more complex forms such as
defenses, self-esteem, and transference. Much of the training of
psychodynamic therapists is the identification and deciphering of
unconscious memory into a form that is accessible to the patient. Freud
believed that a fundamental goal of therapy is to make the unconscious
conscious. From the perspective of rebuilding the brain, this goal can
be described as increasing the interconnection and integration of neural
networks dedicated to unconscious and conscious memory. This process
makes understanding the evolution, development, and functioning

of the various systems of memory crucial to conceptualizing and treating
psychological distress and mental illnesses. It also aids in explaining
to clients some of the paradoxes and confusion they experience based on
the variety of ways their brains process information. Resistance to
Therapy or Memory Deficit? Our sense of worth, of well-being, even our
sanity depends upon our remembering. But, alas, our sense of worth, our
well-being, our sanity also depend upon our forgetting. ---Joyce Appleby
For almost a year, I treated a woman named Sophia who had experienced
repeated traumas and chronic stress dating back to early childhood.
Among the many issues she brought to treatment were family conflict,
early sexual abuse, and current relationship problems. One of Sophia's
long-standing complaints was severe memory difficulties, especially when
it came to remembering names, dates, and appointments. In high school
her teachers told her she was stupid because she was unable to recall
what was said in class from one day to the next. Sophia was so
embarrassed by her inability to remember names that she avoided parties
and all but essential work gatherings. On the other hand, her memory for
emotionally laden experiences was like a steel trap, continually evoking
fear and sadness. Sophia was convinced that the part of her brain
responsible for remembering shame was very different from the one that
recalled names. Sophia had gone to many therapists throughout her adult
life, repeatedly missed appointments, and had been told she was
resistant to treatment. Sophia found this very frustrating but had no
explanation of her own. Based on her history, these therapists assumed
that her problems with memory were caused by denial, avoidance, or
repression, and encouraged her to face her fears. While each therapist
offered their own interpretation of her defensiveness to treatment, none
rang true, and she usually terminated therapy after just a few sessions.
Certain that it was her fault, Sophia's treatment failures led her to
feel increasingly hopeless about ever finding the help she needed. The
annoyance and "criticism" she received from therapists also increased
her feelings of shame. Although she feared our

work together would meet the same fate, she was willing to give therapy
one more try. After learning her history, I shared a bit of neuroscience
to help her better conceptualize her issues with memory. My mini lecture
focused on the destructive role of early and prolonged stress on the
development and well-being of the hippocampus and associated neural
networks responsible for explicit memory. I suggested that we begin our
work by studying memory together and exploring pragmatic ways to improve
it. Along the way we experimented with the use of memory aids from the
field of cognitive rehabilitation. Daytimers, watches with alarms, and
personal digital assistants (PDAs) all proved useful. (The development
of smart phones now allows us to carry all of these functions in one
device, a real boon to many patients.) For the first 2 months, Sophia
and I scheduled telephone contact every other day for a few minutes.
During these contacts, we exercised her memory, checked on the various
strategies we had set up during our previous session, and reinforced her
successes. Initially, Sophia needed help learning to remember to use her
strategies that helped her remember. Utilizing her memory aids and
checking them on a regular basis gradually became automatic even if, in
the moment, she would forget why she was checking her book or calling
me. After 6 weeks, Sophia was consistently able to remember
appointments. This success stimulated confidence in herself and in
therapy. She began to see that her memory problems in no way meant she
was stupid or harbored deep psychological problems. On the contrary, her
self-respect increased as our discussions helped her to realize how much
she had accomplished in her life despite her traumatic history and
struggles with memory. Once memory-related issues were no longer an
impediment to maintaining consistent contact, we shifted the focus of
treatment to the impact of her life experiences on her relationships and
career. The initial focus of therapy, using a formulation from
neuroscience and cognitive rehabilitation, turned out to be a necessary
first step in a sustained and successful therapeutic relationship. From
this point, the therapy was characterized by a more traditional
psychodynamic approach with regular memory checkups and adjustments to
her strategies. Many psychological disorders manifest a variety of
memory deficits. Any disorder that results in substantial arousal and
triggers the secretion of

the stress hormone cortisol can damage neural networks of explicit
memory. In fact, most psychiatric disorders reveal high rates of
cortisol and smaller hippocampi, both of which are correlated with
memory disturbances. In addition to problems with remembering, some
illnesses serve to distort both learning and memory. Depression, for
example, results in a negative bias in the recollection and
interpretation of past, present, and future events (Beck, 1976). It also
leads us to selectively scan the environment, which reinforces negative
perceptions. Depression convincingly demonstrates the influence of
emotional states in the organization of conscious memory, sometimes
called state-dependent memory. Clients report that if they wake up
depressed, everything looks worse than it did the day before, even
though they know, intellectually, that nothing has changed. The rapid
(and unconscious) networks of emotion shape our understanding of the
world microseconds before we become aware of our perception. Through
similar mechanisms, our past experiences create our expectations for the
future. Implicit, unconscious memories, created in dysfunctional
situations years before, can repeatedly lead us to re-create
unsuccessful but familiar patterns of thought, emotion, and behavior.
Thus, our perception of the world is a creation based on past
experience. Multiple Memory Systems Memory...is the diary that we all
carry about with us. ---Oscar Wilde Research and clinical experience
support the existence of multiple memory systems, each with its own
domains of learning, neural architecture, and developmental timetable
(Tulving, 1985). Learning within all systems of memory is dependent on
the process of long-term potentiation in the Hebbian synapses we have
already discussed, as well as the dendritic remodeling and changes in
the relationships between neurons (Hebb, 1949; Kandel, 1998). The two
broadest categories of memory are explicit and implicit. The concepts of
explicit and implicit memory, although similar in some ways to Freud's
concept of the conscious and unconscious, do not directly overlap.
Explicit memory describes conscious learning and memory, including
semantic, sensory, and motor forms. These memory systems allow us to

recite the alphabet, recognize the smell of coconut, or play tennis.
Some of these memory abilities remain just beneath the level of
consciousness until we turn our attention to them. Implicit memory is
reflected in unconscious patterns of learning stored in hidden layers of
neural processing, largely inaccessible to conscious awareness. This
category extends from repressed trauma to riding a bicycle, to getting
an uneasy feeling when we smell a food that once made us sick. Explicit
memory is the tip of our experiential iceberg; implicit memory is the
vast structure below the surface. Many of our daily experiences make it
clear that we have multiple systems of explicit and implicit memory. For
example, moving your fingers over the keypad of an imaginary phone
sometimes helps you recall a phone number. This process demonstrates
that implicit systems of motor and visual memory can aid in the explicit
recall of numbers. Another example is a phenomenon common among older
adults, in which they have difficulty learning new information but
easily recall stories from their youth. This may be because the networks
involved in the storage of long-term explicit memory are distributed
throughout the cortex and are more resistant to the effects of aging
than those responsible for short-and medium-term memory (Schacter,
1996). Thinking back to the triune brain, each tier is involved with
different aspects of memory functioning. The reptilian brain contains
instinctual memories, the lessons of past generations (genetic memory)
that control reflexes, and inner bodily functions. The paleomammalian
brain (limbic system) contributes to emotional memory and conditioned
learning---a mixture of primitive impulses and survival programs
sculpted by experiences. These two systems are nonverbal and comprise
aspects of the Freudian unconscious. The neomammalian brain, although
largely unconscious in its processing, contains networks responsible for
explicit verbal memory biased toward the left hemisphere. Because of the
order in which they develop, implicit and explicit memory (detailed in
Table 5.1) are referred to as early and late memory. Systems of implicit
memory are active even before birth, as demonstrated in the newborn's
instincts to orient to the sound of her mother's voice (de Casper &
Fifer, 1980). During the first months of life, basic sensory memories
combine together with bodily and emotional associations (Stern, 1985).
These networks allow for the sight of one's father to be paired with
raised arms, a smile, and a good feeling. Somatic, sensory, motor, and

emotional experiences help sculpt neural networks during the first few
years into a sense of a physical self. TABLE 5.1 Multiple Memory Systems
A number of the basic distinctions between implicit and explicit systems
of memory IMPLICIT Early Developing Highly Functional at Birth
Subcortical/Amygdala Bias Nondeclarative Emotional
Visceral/Sensory-Motor Context Free Procedural Learning Behavior
Patterns and Manual

EXPLICIT Late Developing Matures later with Hippocampus and Cortex
Cortical/Hippocampal Bias Declarative Organized by Language Visual
Images Organized within Episodes and Narratives Conscious Organization
of Experience Construction of Narrative Self

The development of conscious memory parallels the maturation of the
hippocampus and higher cortical structures over the first years of life
(Fuster, 1996; Jacobs, van Praag, & Gage, 2000; LeDoux, 1996; McCarthy,
1995). Childhood amnesia or the absence of explicit memory from early
life likely results from this maturational delay and other developmental
changes in how our brains process information. In the absence of
explicit memory, however, we learn how to walk and talk, whether the
world is safe or dangerous, and how to attach to others. These vital
early lessons, stored in networks throughout our brain, lack source
attribution; that is, we do not remember how we learned them. Although
many of us think we have explicit memories from the first years of life,
these are most likely constructed later and attributed to an earlier
time in our life.

Explicit memory can be sensory and linguistic, as we associate and
remember sights, sounds, and smells with words and organize them in
conscious memory. For most of us, words and visual images are the keys
to conscious memory. Different types of semantic memory include
episodic, narrative, and autobiographical, which can all be organized
sequentially. Autobiographical memory maintains the perspective of the
narrator at the center of the story. Stories about the self combine
episodic, semantic, and emotional memory with the self-awareness needed
for max-imal neural network integration (Cabeza & St. Jacques, 2007).
This form of memory is especially important for the formation and
maintenance of emotional regulation, self-identity, and the transmission
of culture. Overall, the development of the different systems of memory
reflects the early primacy of implicit memory for learning in sensory,
motor, and emotional networks. These early-forming neural networks
depend on the more primitive brain structures such as the amygdala,
thalamus, and middle portions of the frontal cortex (Figure 5.1). As the
cortex and the hippocampus continue to develop over the first few years
of life, there is a gradual maturation of the networks of explicit
memory. These systems provide for conscious, contextualized learning and
memory that becomes more consistent and stable over time. The various
systems of memory are distributed throughout the brain and where a
particular memory is stored depends on the type of memory and how it is
encoded (McCarthy, 1995). A good example of the distribution of memory
comes from an experiment measuring cerebral blood flow while subjects
were asked to name pictures of either animals or hand tools (Martin,
Wiggs, Ungerleider, & Haxby, 1996). Naming both animals and tools
resulted in increased activity in the temporal lobes and Broca's area.
This makes sense, because the temporal lobes are known to be important
for the organization of memory whereas Broca's area organizes verbal
expression. More specifically, naming tools activated areas in the left
motor cortex involved in the hand movements that would be used to
control them (Martin et al., 1996). This suggests that part of our "tool
memory" is stored in neural networks that utilize them. While there is
overlap of activation during picture naming, the nature of the visual
image triggers brain areas relevant to what is depicted. Thus, memory is
a form of internal enactment of whatever is being recalled.

The portion of the visual system activated by pictures of animals is an
area involved with very early stages of visual processing. This may be a
reflection of how evolution has shaped the primitive areas of our visual
brains to recognize and react quickly to threats from possible predators
(animals chosen for this study happened to be a bear and an ape, both
evolutionarily relevant based on their potential danger to us). Research
has consistently demonstrated that the occipital lobe becomes activated
when something is seen and, later, imagined. In the case of the imagined
memory, the prefrontal area also becomes activated, reflecting its role
in processing the instructions, staying on task, and accessing
imagination. How neural networks in the prefrontal cortex know how to do
this is as yet unknown (Ungerleider, 1995). Although these studies focus
primarily on cortical activity, psychotherapy often involves the
retrieval of subcortical emotional memories. Emotional memories rely on
subcortical structures such as the amygdala and hippocampus: both
central to upcoming discussions of psychopathology and the impact of
childhood experiences, stress, and trauma on adult functioning.
Amygdaloid Memory Networks Nothing fixes a thing so intensely in memory
as the wish to forget it. ---Michel de Montaigne The amygdala, the
central hub of fear processing, is located within the limbic system and
beneath the temporal lobes on each side of the brain. It is fully
developed by the eighth month of gestation, so that even before birth,
we are capable of experiencing intense physiological states of fear.
During the first few years of life we are dependent on caretakers for
external modulation of the amygdala until we are able to regulate it
ourselves. In some ways the amygdala is our first cortex, playing a
significant role in the networks involved in emotional learning (Brodal,
1992). Portions of the amygdala (the basolateral areas) have evolved in
tandem with the expansion of the cerebral cortex in humans along with
our abilities to assess the environment (Stephan & Andy, 1977). The
amygdala's neural connectivity supports its participation in the
integration of the different senses within humans, with a special
emphasis

on vision (van Hoesen, 1981). It functions as an organ of appraisal for
danger, safety, and familiarity in approach-avoidance situations
(Berntson et al., 2007; Elliott, Agnew, & Deakin, 2008; Sarter &
Markowitsch, 1985). In association with medial areas of the frontal
cortex, it connects emotional value to the object of the senses based on
both instincts and learning history, and translates these appraisals
into bodily states (Davis, 1992; LeDoux, 1986). It is a central neural
player in associating conscious and unconscious indications of danger
with preparation for a survival response (Ohman, Carlsson, Lundqvist, &
Ingvar, 2007). Most important for psychotherapy is that it plays a
"behind the screens" role in creating emotional bias in conscious
processing by spinning our experience in ways that make us, for example,
see the glass as half empty or half full (Kukolja et al., 2008). Two
circuits of sensory input reach the amygdala in the adult brain. The
first comes directly from the thalamus and the other first loops through
the cortex and hippocampus before reaching the amygdala (LeDoux, 1994).
The first system serves rapid responses during survival decisions based
on a minimum of information. The slower second system adds cortical
processing (context and inhibition) to appraise ongoing perceptions and
behaviors. The amygdala's direct neural connectivity with the
hypothalamus, limbic-motor circuits, and many brainstem nuclei allows it
to trigger a rapid survival response. The emotional power of phobias and
flashbacks is greatly enhanced by the activation of intense somatic
arousal provided by this direct connectivity. Thus, the amygdala is one
of the key components of affective memory, not just in infancy but
throughout life (Chavez, McGaugh, & Weinberger, 2009; Ross, Homan, &
Buck, 1994). In a fully developed brain, the amygdala also enhances
hippocampal processing of emotional memory by stimulating the release of
norepinephrine and glucocorticoids via other brain structures (McGaugh,
2004; McGaugh et al., 1993). Through these chemical messages, the
hippocampus is alerted to the importance of remembering what is being
experienced---a key component of new learning. The activation of the
sympathetic nervous system alters the chemical environment within and
between neurons, enhancing LTP and neural plasticity. We will return to
this topic in greater detail in later chapters, when we discuss the
impact of stress and trauma on the brain.

The Amygdala and Unusual Experiences The "uncanny" elements we know from
experience arise either when repressed childhood complexes are revived
by some impression, or when primitive beliefs that have been
"surmounted" appear to be once again confirmed. ---Sigmund Freud Given
the amygdala's early development and its unique role in learning and
memory, abnormalities of amygdala functioning may be involved in some
unusual human experiences. Electrical stimulation of the amygdala has
been shown to result in a wide variety of bodily sensations, feelings of
anxiety, déjà vu, and memory-like hallucinations (Chapman, Walter,
Markham, Rand, & Crandall, 1967; Halgren, Walter, Cherlow, & Crandall,
1978; Penfield & Perot, 1963; Weingarten, Cherlow, & Holmgren, 1977).
Because of its low seizure threshold, subtle seizure activity may
trigger the amygdala to activate normally inhibited sensory and
emotional memories that then break through into conscious awareness
(Sarter & Markowitsch, 1985). These primitive memories may also become
triggered by sensory cues of past fears and account for posttraumatic
intrusions (van der Kolk & Greenberg, 1987). Individuals under stress
may be particularly vulnerable to the intrusion of powerful but
conscious memories, even from very early childhood (Cozolino, 1997).
Primary process thinking and dreamlike experiences are more likely to
merge with conscious awareness in situations of decreasing contextual
cues, as in near-sleep states or conditions of sensory deprivation
(Schacter, 1976). Decreasing contextual cues lessen the ability of the
corticohippocampal systems to utilize past learning to make sense of
present experience and inhibit amygdala input to conscious awareness.
This may account for the success of projective testing in tapping into
unconscious processing. In attempting to make sense of ambiguous
situations, subcortical circuits are more likely to guide conscious
awareness. Individuals with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) often
experience extreme religiosity, suggesting that stimulation of the
amygdala can infuse everyday experience with a sense of deep
significance. In other words, its ability to inform the rest of the
brain that we are experiencing something highly significant can be
applied in an inappropriate manner leading to odd and

delusional thinking. The central nucleus of the amygdala also has a high
density of opioid receptors, which are biochemical mechanisms of bonding
and attachment behavior (Goodman, Snyder, Kuhar, & Young, 1980; Herman &
Panksepp, 1978; Kalin, Shelton, & Lynn, 1995; Kalin, Shelton, & Snowdon,
1993) that are also implicated in alterations of consciousness. This
suggests that unregulated activation of the amygdala may be a
neurobiological trigger for the religious preoccupations occurring in
some individuals with TLE. The fact that hypergraphia (writing a lot)
can also be a symptom of TLE has led many to speculate that some
religious texts have been driven by unusual amygdala activation
stimulated by seizure activity. Hippocampal Memory Networks A memory is
what is left when something happens and does not completely unhappen.
---Edward de Bono The hippocampi, shaped like seahorses on either side
of the human brain, are essential structures for the encoding and
storage of explicit memory and learning (Zola-Morgan & Squire, 1990) and
play a central role in the organization of spatial and temporal
information (Edelman, 1989; Kalisch et al., 2006; O'Keefe & Nadel, 1978;
Selden, Everitt, Jarrard, & Robbins, 1991; Sherry, Jacobs, & Gaulin,
1992). The hippocampus also participates in our ability to compare
different memories and make inferences from previous learning in new
situations (Eichenbaum, 1992). If damaged, it can prevent new learning
from occurring, condemning the victim to forgetting everything a few
seconds after it is experienced (Squire, 1987). The hippocampus is noted
for its late maturation, with the myelination of cortical-hippocampal
circuits continuing into early adulthood (Benes, 1989; Geuze, Vermetten,
& Bramner, 2005). The late development of the hippocampus and its
connectivity with the cortex reflects both its delayed functional
availability and prolonged sensitivity to developmental disruption and
traumatic insult. It remains particularly vulnerable to hypoxia (lack of
oxygen) throughout life. Mountain climbers and deep sea divers who may
experience periods of decreased oxygen availability have been shown to
have hippocampal damage and short-term memory deficits. Gradual atrophy
of the hippocampus appears to be a natural component of

aging, along with a corresponding decrease in explicit memory abilities
(Gartside, Leitch, McQuade, & Swarbrick, 2003; Golomb et al., 1993).
Research suggests that sustained stress results in excessive exposure of
the hippocampus to glucocorticoids (cortisol), released in response to
acute stress (Sapolsky, 1987). Prolonged high levels of glucocorticoids
can result in dendritic degeneration, cell death, increased
vulnerability to future neurological insult, and inhibited hippocampal
functioning (Kim & Diamond, 2002; Watanabe, Gould, & McEwen, 1992).
Patients suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) secondary
to childhood trauma or combat exposure, prolonged depression, temporal
lobe epilepsy (de Lanerolle, Kim, Robbins, & Spencer, 1989), and
schizophrenia (Falkai & Bogerts, 1986; Nelson, Saykin, Flashman, &
Riordan, 1998) have also been shown to have hippocampal cell loss.
Decreases in hippocampal volume have been shown to correlate with
deficits of encoding short-term into longterm memory and an increased
vulnerability to psychological trauma (Bremner, Scott, et al., 1993;
Gilbertson et al., 2002). Given that chronic stress correlates with
decreased hippocampal volume, and that so many patients in psychotherapy
have experienced chronic stress, it is logical to assume that many
patients (like Sophia) have difficulty in those functions which depend
upon the hippocampus. Amygdaloid-Hippocampal Interaction The struggle of
man against power is the struggle of memory against forgetting. ---Milan
Kundera The relationship between the amygdala and hippocampus is
extremely important to human experience and contributes significantly to
top-down and left-right integration. The participation of the amygdala
is biased toward both right and down systems, whereas the hippocampus
plays a large role in left and top processing. Put another way, the
amygdala has a central role in the emotional and somatic organization of
experience, whereas the hippocampus is vital for conscious, logical, and
cooperative social functioning (Tsoory et al., 2008). Their relationship
will impact affect regulation, reality testing, resting states of
arousal and anxiety, and our ability to learn emotional and more neutral
information. The level and

quality of the functional connectivity of the amygdala and hippocampus
will be impacted by temperament, life stress, and epigenetic factors
(Canli et al., 2006). Douglas and Pribram (1966) suggested that the
amygdala and hippocampus play opposite roles in an attention-directing
process. By accentuating small differences among inputs, the amygdala
heightens awareness of specific aspects of the environment (attention)
whereas the hippocampus inhibits responses, attention, and stimulus
input (habituation) (Douglas, 1967; Kimble, 1968; Marr, 1971). The
amygdala is involved with generalization, while the hippocampus is
involved with discrimination (Sherry & Schacter, 1987). In other words,
the amygdala will make us jump at the sight of a spider, while the
hippocampus will help us to remember that this particular spider is not
poisonous, so we shouldn't worry. Their proper balance will also allow
us to stay close to others even when they cause us upset. We can
immediately see the relevance of these two systems to psychotherapy. The
amygdaloid memory system, organizing early shame experience, makes the
patient with borderline personality disorder react to the perception of
abandonment when little or none exists in reality. Therapy with this
patient would utilize the hippocampal-cortical systems to test the
reality of these amygdala-triggered cues for abandonment in order to
inhibit inappropriate reactions. This reality testing helps us to
distinguish real abandonment from innocent triggers such as someone
showing up a few minutes late for an appointment and inhibit
inappropriate emotional reactions. Remember, for a young primate,
abandonment means death. The catastrophic reaction of borderline
patients to abandonment is a result of the fact that, to them, it is
experienced as life threatening. Flashbacks, memories from traumatic
experiences, likely reside in amygdaloid-driven memory networks. PTSD
victims describe flashbacks as powerful and multisensory, often
triggered by stress, and experienced as if they were occurring in the
present (Gloor, 1978; LeDoux, Romanski, & Xagoraris, 1989; van der Kolk
& Greenberg, 1987). These flashbacks also have the characteristic of
being stereotyped and repetitive (van der Kolk, Blitz, Burr, Sherry, &
Hartmann, 1984), suggesting that they are not subject to the
assimilating and contextualizing properties of the cortex and
hippocampus. A model of dual memory processing, paralleling the
amygdala/hippocampal distinction made here, has been previously

proposed as underlying mechanisms in both PTSD (Brewin, Dalgleish, &
Joseph, 1996) and the reemergence of past fears and phobias (Jacobs &
Nadel, 1985). Given the reciprocal nature of amygdaloid and hippocampal
circuits, impairment of the hippocampus should lead to an increased
influence of the amygdala in directing memory, emotion, and behavior.
This imbalance toward the amygdala would also disrupt affect regulation.
Depressed patients are overwhelmed by their negative feelings and unable
to engage in adequate reality testing. Indeed, Sheline and her
colleagues noted both decreased hippocampal and amygdaloid volume in
depressed patients (Sheline, Wang, Gado, Csernansky, & Vannier, 1996;
Sheline, Gado, & Price, 1998). Dysregulation of hippocampal-amygdaloid
circuits are likely involved in depressive symptomatology and disturbed
reality testing (Pittenger & Duman, 2008). Research with rats has found
that increased levels of serotonin leads to enhanced neurogenesis in the
hippocampus (Jacobs et al., 2000). This suggests that Prozac and Paxil
may be effective in treating depression because they boost hippocampal
volume and its ability to moderate amygdala activation. The Intrusion of
Early Implicit Memory Into Adult Consciousness All our knowledge has its
origins in our perceptions. ---Leonardo da Vinci Early memories stored
in circuits of the amygdala and right hemisphere can intrude into adult
consciousness in a variety of ways. They become especially relevant to
psychotherapy when they are the result of trauma and impact our ability
to love and work. Children who suffer early abuse may enter their
school-age years agitated, aggressive, and destructive. They may engage
in fights, property damage, setting fires, or hurting animals, resulting
in criticism, punishment, and social exclusion. Although these behaviors
are expressions of their memories of abuse, others react with criticism
and retaliation. This feedback, in combination with the emotional
damages from their abuse, evolves into an ever-deepening negative
selfimage. In the absence of an explicit memory of their early trauma,
these children's behavior is not experienced by them as a reaction to a
negative

past event, but as an affirmation of their inner feelings of essential
badness. Because these experiences date back to the formation of
preverbal sensory, motor, and affective memory systems, victims often
report feeling "evil to the core." This is common in children who grow
up in cults or with highly authoritarian or abusive parents. The kids of
soldiers, police officers, and ministers appear to be at particular risk
for the internalization of a negative self-image. Children of parents
with obsessive-compulsive disorder can also find they hold an extremely
negative view of themselves. While a person with OCD needs order,
cleanliness, and control, a newborn brings just the opposite into their
life. The child's early implicit memories are likely to be centered
around being a source of annoyance, anxiety, and disgust to their
parents. The formation of attachment schema (a key form of implicit
memory) guides and shapes relationships throughout life. Given that so
many clients come to therapy with relationship difficulties, this
implicit memory system may be one of the most important to explore in
psychotherapy. These same networks of social memory give rise to the
phenomenon of transference, a process that brings these early
unconscious memories into the consulting room as they are played out
between client and therapist. Enactments in psychotherapy, involving the
interplay between unconscious elements within the patient and the
therapist, also activate these implicit memories. We have all
experienced having our buttons pushed by someone; many of these
"buttons" are the emotional traces of personal experiences, stored in
implicit systems of memory. Overreacting to something implies that the
difference between an appropriate reaction and how we actually react is
attributable to a sensitivity based on our learning history. The most
common distortions based on the input of early memory are in the
direction of shame, a primary socializing affect starting at about 12
months (Schore, 1994). Individuals who are "shame based" (Bradshaw,
1990) can find criticism, rejection, and abandonment in nearly every
interaction, resulting in a life of chronic anxiety, a struggle for
perfection, exhaustion, and depression. Silence is an ambiguous stimulus
that activates systems of implicit memory. Silence may be golden, but in
therapy it evokes a variety of implicit memories. The reaction of
clients to the silence teaches us something of their emotional history.
During periods of silence, many clients assume that the therapist is
thinking critical thoughts. They imagine

the therapist thinks they are boring, stupid, a waste of time, or a bad
client. These feelings usually mirror those based in problematic
relationships with one or both parents. Furthermore, these feelings are
deep seated and tenacious, often taking many years to make conscious,
examine, and modify. On the other hand, some clients find silence to be
a form of acceptance and a relief from the pressures of being articulate
and communicative. These stark differences in client reactions to the
similar situations are convincing evidence of the workings of implicit
memory and their effects on conscious experience. A similar phenomenon
occurs in individuals who become uncomfortable when they try to relax
without any distractions. The emotions, images, and thoughts that emerge
in conditions of low stimulation (or the absence of distraction) may
hold clues to the workings of our brains and the aftereffects of early
learning. Defenses to escape negative feelings come to require constant
action and distraction to keep us from becoming frightened or
overwhelmed. The Malleability of Memory The only paradise is paradise
lost. ---Marcel Proust The false memory debate of years past highlighted
many shortcomings in the knowledge of therapists when it came to
understanding the workings of memory. Highly publicized legal cases of
repressed memory and clinician contribution to the co-construction of
false memories have resulted in increased understanding and training
focused on the processes of memory. Most therapists are now aware of the
vulnerability of conscious memory to suggestion, distortion, and
fabrication from both client and therapist (Loftus, 1988; Paz-Alonso &
Goodman, 2008). Research has demonstrated that memory can be implanted
in experimental situations where the subject soon becomes certain that
the false memories have actually occurred (Ceci & Bruch, 1993; Loftus,
Milo, & Paddock, 1995). A therapist's belief that her client has been
abused may influence that patient to unconsciously fabricate a memory
that they both then come to believe is true. This process is a clear
demonstration of both the malleability of memory and the power of
co-constructed narrative in

shaping experience (Alberini, 2005; Anderson, Wais, & Gabrieli, 2006;
Dudai, 2006; Nielson, Yee, & Erickson, 2005). Given that memory is
encoded among neurons and within neural networks, the malleability of
memory is an observable manifestation of the plasticity of these neural
systems. This malleability is certainly a stumbling block to our justice
system, which relies so heavily on eyewitness testimony. The hundreds of
convictions that have been overthrown by new DNA methods attest to the
inadequacy of our present standards of eyewitness evidence. But from the
perspective of psychotherapy, this plasticity provides an avenue to the
alteration of destructive memories. Revisiting and evaluating childhood
experiences from an adult perspective often leads to rewriting history
in a creative and positive way. The introduction of new information or
scenarios to past experiences can alter the nature of memories and
modify affective reactions. The Magic Tricycle The greatest weapon
against stress is our ability to choose one thought over another.
---William James Sheldon was a man in his late 60s who came to therapy
for help with his many anxieties and fears. As a child, his parents had
hidden him from the Nazis in a storage room behind the home of family
friends. One day, after finding out that she and Sheldon's father would
soon be taken to the concentration camps, Sheldon's mother told him to
be a good boy, said goodbye, and left. While the family friends were
kind to him, he spent his days alone with few toys, his small tricycle,
and some scraps of food. Describing these days, Sheldon recalled
alternating states of terror and boredom, during which he would either
sit and rock or ride his tricycle around in slow tight circles. The
slightest noise would startle him and he feared that each passing siren
might be the police coming for him. Each day, exhausted by fear, he
would eventually fall asleep. The intervening decades had not diminished
the impact of his experiences during the war; 60 years later, he still
found himself reflexively rocking or walking in small slow circles when
he became frightened. His life felt like one long, fear-filled day. In
repeatedly recalling these

experiences in treatment, he sometimes mentioned how he wished he could
have left the house where he was hidden and traveled down the narrow
streets to his grandmother's house. Sheldon remembered long afternoons
he spent there before the war, listening to stories of her childhood on
her father's farm. His grandmother and his parents perished in the war,
and he never saw them again. One day, I asked him for permission to
change his memories just a bit. After a few quizzical looks he agreed to
close his eyes and tell me the entire story again, at which point I
would interrupt him and make some suggestions. As he came to the part of
the story where he rode around in circles, I asked him, "What would you
do if this was a magic tricycle and it could take you through walls
without getting hurt?" I felt Sheldon had sufficient ego strength to
allow him to simultaneously engage in the roleplay while staying fully
in touch with present reality. After some hesitation, Sheldon said, "I
would ride right through the house and out onto the sidewalk." "Fine," I
said. "Let's go!" Sheldon had been primed for our imaginary therapy play
because he had spent many enjoyable hours of storytelling, cuddling, and
laughing with his grandchildren. I felt that an imaginative task like
this was not only accessible to him but would also serve the purpose of
bridging the positive affect from his grandchildren to his lonely and
frightened experiences as a child. Imagining he was making up the story
for his grandchildren might also help him cope with the embarrassment of
doing this with another adult. After some mild hesitation, he pedaled
through the house. As he got close to the door, however, he said,
"They'll see me and kill me." "What if the magic tricycle has the power
to make you invisible?" I asked. "I think that'll do," said Sheldon, and
he pedaled through the front of the house and out onto the sidewalk.
Once he got out of the house, he knew what to do. He described the
street to me as he pedaled toward his grandmother's house. The
storekeepers, the neighbors, the park, his rabbi, even some of his young
friends were all alive in his memories. Sure enough, when he finally got
to his grandmother's house she was home and, as always, happy to see
him. He told his grandmother about his invisible tricycle and how scared
he was in his hiding place. He went on to tell her of the end of the
war, his travels, and raising his family. Finally, almost like a

prayer, Sheldon told her how, many years from now, she would have the
most beautiful great-great-grandchildren living in freedom, redeeming
her suffering. Over the next few months, whenever Sheldon experienced
his childhood fears and anxieties, we would revisit his story and modify
different details. These changes seemed to grow more detailed and more
vivid in his mind. His imagination gave him the power to master many of
his past fears. Because memory is modified each time it is remembered,
Sheldon's brain was able to gradually contaminate his painful childhood
with his present safety and joy (Bruner, 1990). He even began to tell
his grandchildren stories about a little boy with a magic tricycle who
accomplished great things with his courage and wit. Sheldon was a very
special man who was able to take advantage of the malleability of memory
to make his inner world a safer place. Nothing had changed about his
childhood except that now, when he remembered his hiding place, he also
remembered his magic tricycle. An important part of restructuring memory
is something Freud called Nachtraglichkeit, which means the ability to
reconceptualize a memory based on evolving maturity. This process
requires being able to hold the memory in mind without being emotionally
overwhelmed and simultaneously bringing it into the present, picturing
it as it would look from the perspective of who we are and what we know
today. Both Freud's idea and Sheldon's experiences highlight the fact
that memory is an evolving process that is subject to positive
influence. The construction and reconstruction of autobiographical
narratives requires that the semantic processing of the left hemisphere
integrate with the emotional networks in the right. Storytelling also
invokes participation of the body as we gesture and act out the events
we are describing. As such, narratives are a valuable tool in the
organization and integration of neural networks prone to dissociation.
Because we can write and rewrite our own stories, new ones hold the
potential for novel ways of experiencing. In editing our narratives, we
change the organization and nature of our memories and, hence,
reorganize our brains. This is a central endeavor in many forms of
psychotherapy. Summary

As a boy in the early 1960s, I remember being fascinated by news stories
of Japanese soldiers attacking tourists on tiny islands in the South
Pacific. During World War II, the Japanese navy left soldiers on many
islands throughout the Pacific but never retrieved them at the end of
the war. Decades later, pleasure crafts would innocently land on these
islands only to be attacked by soldiers who thought the war was still
being fought. They had dutifully kept guns oiled and remained vigilant
for decades in anticipation of an American attack. I was awed by their
loyalty and saddened by the thought of the years they spent fighting a
war that no longer existed. Like these soldiers, early amygdala-based
memory systems retain struggles, stress, and trauma from a time before
conscious memory. We may grow and move on to new lives, yet our implicit
memory systems retain old fears. While remaining vigilant for signs of
attack for early attachment pain, approaching intimacy can set off all
of the danger signals. Therapists are trained to be amygdala whisperers
who land on these beaches, attempting to convince the loyal soldiers
within implicit systems of memory that the war is over. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 6

Laterality: One Brain or Two? Though the brain is enclosed in a single
skull, it is actually made of two separate lumps...which are designed to
disagree with each other. ---Jonah Lehrer We now switch our focus from
the multiple and diverse systems of memory to another realm of neural
complexity---cortical laterality. As you know, the human cerebral cortex
is divided into right and left hemispheres, each controlling the
opposite side of the body. The term laterality refers to the
specialization of certain tasks to one side of the brain or the other,
and is reflected in how the hemispheres differ in their organization,
processing strategies, and neural connectivity. Keep in mind also that
laterality shows variability among individuals, and left-and
right-handed people, as well as males and females. Although most neural
processing requires the contribution of both hemispheres, there are
situations when the hemispheres not only think differently but also
compete with one another. This struggle for dominance and control may be
one cause of our psychological struggles, giving new meaning to why we
sometimes feel "beside ourselves" or "of two minds." By the end of this
chapter, you may be left wondering whether we in fact have one brain or
two. John Hughlings Jackson, the eminent 19th-century neurologist,
believed that the left side of the brain was, for most people, the
"leading" side. This seemed logical given Broca's finding that the left
hemisphere was responsible for our ability to use semantic language.
Jackson later suggested that the right hemisphere was the leading side
of the brain in visual-spatial abilities.

Over the years, it has become clear that dividing the brain into two
discrete halves is not the best approach. Given that most neural systems
integrate circuitry from the left and right sides of the brain, research
attempting to localize functions in one hemisphere or the other often
results in "untidy" findings (Christman, 1994). When we speak of
functions of the right or left brain, we are more accurately referring
to functions that are either represented more fully or performed more
efficiently in one hemisphere than the other. Over the past 40 years,
much has been written about the artistic right brain and the logical
left. Although this view may be appealing to the imagination, it is far
too simplistic. Assigning specific functions to particular areas of the
brain needs to be done with both caution and the recognition that our
knowledge is still evolving. Evolution and Development A scientific
truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see
the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die and a new
generation grows up that is familiar with it. ---Max Planck Lateral
specialization is an evolutionary choice, and does not exist in all
animals. Many birds and fish, for example, have identical hemispheres.
These animals are able to sleep one hemisphere at a time, allowing them
to keep swimming or flying to avoid predators, continue feeding, or rest
during long migrations. Although redundant hemispheres provide certain
benefits, such as a backup system in case of injury, hemispheric
specialization via natural selection promotes neural complexity. Through
human evolution, the right and left cerebral hemispheres have become
increasingly dissimilar (Geschwind & Galaburda, 1985). Lateral dominance
appears to have been delegated depending on the functional domain in
question (Cutting, 1992; Goldberg & Costa, 1981; Semmes, 1968). For
example, areas of the left and right cortices have become specialized in
the organization of the conscious linguistic self in the left and the
physical emotional self in the right. During the first 2 years of life,
the right hemisphere has a growth spurt that parallels the rapid
development of sensorimotor, emotional, and

relational capabilities (Casey, Galvan, et al., 2005; Chiron et al.,
1997; Thatcher, Walker, & Giudice, 1987). The child learns hand--eye
coordination, crawling, and walking while becoming attached to
caretakers. An organized sense of the body in space and the embodied
self form in subcortical and cortical networks involving the thalamus,
cerebellum, and parietal cortex. At the same time, middle portions of
the prefrontal cortex are maturing and integrating with subcortical
structures to establish the basic structures of emotional regulation and
attachment. During this period, the development of the left hemisphere
is slowed a bit and reserved for later-developing functions (Gould,
1977). In the middle of the second year, a growth spurt occurs in the
left hemisphere and an explosion in language and locomotion launches
children into the broader physical and social worlds. In the frontal
lobes, there is a shift of development to the dorsolateral areas,
linking back to other cortical regions, that sculpts the language
network (Tucker, 1992) while connecting the movements of hands and eyes
to visual stimuli and words. The corpus callosum begins to develop at
the end of the first year, is significantly developed by age 4, and
continues to mature past the age of 10. Because of this slow maturation,
the two hemispheres at first function relatively autonomously, gradually
gaining interconnection and coordination through childhood (Galin,
Johnstone, Nakell, & Herron, 1979). A great deal of what is known about
the functions of the different hemispheres has been the result of the
split-brain research of Sperry and his colleagues (Sperry, Gazzaniga, &
Bogen, 1969). Split-brain patients are individuals suffering from
medication-resistant epilepsy, who have their corpus callosum surgically
severed to limit seizures to one side of the brain. Presenting
information separately to each of their hemispheres has revealed
divisions of awareness and specialization in a range of cognitive and
emotional tasks, thereby expanding our knowledge of cortical laterality
(LeDoux, Wilson, & Gazzaniga, 1977; Ross et al., 1994; Sperry, 1968).
Lateral Asymmetry All organs of an animal form a single system...and no
modification can appear in one part without bringing about corresponding
modifications in all the rest. ---George Cuvier

The earliest form of language was most likely hand gestures, which may
explain why handedness and language functions are so closely linked in
the brain. Most of us are right-handed (controlled by the left brain)
and have semantic language lateralized in the left hemisphere. Neural
networks for both spoken and sign language are located in the left
hemisphere for most adults, and damage to the left hemisphere usually
results in language disturbances such as aphasia (Corina, Vaid, &
Bellugi, 1992). In left-handed or ambidextrous individuals,
lateralization of language is somewhat less clear. As the semantic
functions of the cortex expanded during evolution and language became
more descriptive and useful, words gradually replaced gestures in
importance. Our present use of hand gestures to augment spoken language
may betray this evolutionary path. Our tendency to use hand gestures
even when talking on the telephone suggests that they not only play a
role in communication but also in organizing and supporting our
thinking. The left hemisphere appears to be more involved in conscious
coping and problem solving than the right. This is most likely a
function of its language skills and prosocial orientation. The left
hemisphere functions best within the middle range of affect and is
biased toward positive emotions and approach behaviors (Silberman &
Weingartner, 1986). Strong affect, especially anxiety and terror, result
in high levels of right hemisphere activation and appears to inhibit the
left hemisphere and language---hence, the experience of stage fright and
speechless terror. It has been suggested that Wernicke's area in the
left temporal lobe, known to be centrally involved in language
comprehension, acts as a probability calculator for other forms of
behavior as well as language (Bischoff-Grethe, Proper, Mao, Daniels, &
Berns, 2000). Given the rapidity with which we process speech,
Wernicke's area may process what is heard based as much on what it
expects to hear as what is actually said. This would certainly help to
explain why human communication can be so problematic and
misunderstandings so common. Broca's area may have similar predictive
functions, which allow us to speak faster than we think and even, at
times, be surprised by what we hear ourselves saying (Nishitani et al.,
2004). In fact, William James, one of the fathers of American
psychology, said that he needed to hear himself talk to know what was on
his mind.

For most individuals, the right hemisphere processes information in a
holistic fashion and is densely connected to the limbic systems and the
viscera (Nebes, 1971). The left hemisphere, on the other hand, processes
information in a linear, sequential manner and has less connection with
the body. The right hemisphere is heavily wired to the limbic system and
is more directly involved in the regulation of the endocrine and
autonomic nervous systems than the left (Wittling & Pfluger, 1990). It
also contains centers within the parietal lobes that might contain a
representation of the entire body. The right hemisphere is generally
responsible for both appraising the safety and danger of others and
organizing a sense of the corporeal and emotional self (Devinsky, 2000).
Appraisal simply means attaching a positive or negative association to a
stimulus, while emotion is the conscious manifestation of this appraisal
process (Fischer, Shaver, & Carnochan, 1990; Fox, 1991). The vast
majority of appraisal occurs at an unconscious level. This is why the
right hemisphere is more often associated with the unconscious mind,
that is, what guides our thoughts and behavior outside of our awareness.
The bias against left-handedness across many cultures may reflect an
intuitive understanding of the left hand's (right brain's) relationship
to the dark, primitive aspects of our nature. These biases likely date
back into prehistory, when the left hemisphere may have exerted less
inhibitory control over the right. Think about the French word gauche
and the Italian sinestre for left and all their tasteless and evil
connotations. By offering the right hand in greeting, early humans may
have been more likely to behave in a civilized manner, and less likely
to act out selfish or violent impulses. An examination of cave drawings
in Southern Europe suggests that the bias toward right-handedness has
existed for at least the last 5,000 years (Coren & Porac, 1977).
Although the left hemisphere generally produces semantic language, it is
unclear whether it has any advantage in language comprehension. The
right hemisphere may, in fact, be better at comprehending the emotional
aspects of language such as the tone of voice or the attitude with which
words are said (Searleman, 1977). Emotions in general, the ability to
evaluate emotional facial expressions, and visual-spatial and musical
abilities are primarily right-hemisphere processes (Ahern et al., 1991).
Damage to the right hemisphere results not only in an impairment of our

ability to assess facial gestures, but also to comprehend other
nonverbal aspects of communication such as hand gestures and tone of
voice (Blonder, Bowers, & Heilman, 1991). Laterality and Emotion When
angry, count to four; when very angry, swear. ---Mark Twain Evidence
suggestive of a relationship between laterality and emotionality was
first observed in cases of damage to the prefrontal cortex. Patients
with damage to the left hemisphere appeared to be far more likely to
have a depressive reaction than those with damage to the right
(Gainotti, 1972; Goldstein, 1939; Sackheim et al., 1982). It was later
found that the closer these lesions were to the prefrontal regions, the
more severe the symptoms of depression (Robinson et al., 1984). Right
brain-damaged patients were also found to describe experiences with less
emotional intensity than left brain-damaged patients or normal controls
(Borod et al., 1998). Imaging studies have shown that people without
brain damage who suffer from depression have lower levels of glucose
metabolism and cerebral blood flow in the left prefrontal cortex
(Galynker et al., 1998; Kalia, 2005; Mathew et al., 1980). In addition,
people experiencing mania in the absence of brain damage demonstrate
decreased right prefrontal activity (Al-Mousawi et al., 1996). These
studies expand the association between laterality and emotion to the
general population. An examination of Table 6.1 reveals that the left
hemisphere is biased toward positive affect, safety, and positive social
approach, as well as anger and aggression directed toward others.
Overall, the left side of the brain appears to be in charge of the
successful navigation of the social world. TABLE 6.1 Laterality and
Emotion Increased left hemisphere activation occurs in response to:
Happy stimuli1 Positive pictures2

Positive affect in response to positive films3 Approach-related
dispositional tendencies4 More positive disposition5 Smiling and facial
expressions of enjoyment6 Reported well-being7 Infant smiling in
response to mother approach8 Trait anger9 State anger10 State
aggression11 Increased right hemisphere activation occurs in response
to: Facial expressions of disgust12 Tastes associated with disgust13
Negative pictures14 Avoidance behavior15 Negative affect in response to
negative films16 Threat-related vigilance17 Stranger approach18 Maternal
separation19 The intimate association between emotion and cognition has
been demonstrated in many laterality studies. For example, sad faces are
rated as relatively sadder when presented to the left visual field
compared to the right (Sackheim et al., 1988). Negative stimuli are
consciously perceived most often when presented to the right hemisphere
(Smith & BulmanFleming, 2004). Research has shown that anesthesia of the
left hemisphere results in greater expressions of negative emotions and
less prosocial explanations of experience (Dimond & Farrington, 1977;
Ross et al., 1994). Orienting eye gaze to the left (stimulating the
right hemisphere) results in decreased optimism, while the opposite is
true with rightward eye gaze

(Drake, 1984; Thayer & Cohen, 1985). Righthemisphere-biased neural
processing correlates with low self-esteem (Persinger & Makarec, 1991).
Higher levels of left prefrontal activation have been associated with a
resilient affective style, faster recovery following negative events,
and lower levels of the stress hormone cortisol (Davidson, 2004; Jackson
et al., 2003; Kalin, Larson, Shelton, & Davidson, 1998). While there
appears to be an overall bias of positive left/negative right, the
picture is more complicated. The hemispheres are also lateralized for
social/private and approach/avoidance (left/right) behavior. These
patterns of left/right activation suggest that health and happiness may
be associated with general lateral balance as well as the ability to be
aggressive and express anger biased toward the left and grief and shame
biased toward the right. The Integration of the Body in the Right
Hemisphere The body never lies. ---Martha Graham The parietal lobes,
located above our ears toward the top of our heads, are at the
crossroads of neural networks responsible for vision, hearing, and
sensation. They serve as a high-level association area for the
coordination and integration of these functions. The anterior (front)
portion of the parietal lobes organizes tactile perception, while the
posterior (back) portion interconnects the senses to organize
sensory-motor with conceptual events (Joseph, 1996). Accordingly, cells
in the parietal lobes respond to hand position, eye movement, words,
motivational relevance, body position, and other factors relevant to the
integration of experience. The purpose of the association of all of
these high-order processing networks is to provide a coordinated and
integrated awareness of one's own body and its relation to the external
environment (Ropper & Brown, 2005). This makes sense in that the
parietal lobes evolved from the hippocampus, which, in lower mammals,
serves as a cognitive map for external space (O'Keefe & Nadel, 1978).
Part of the job of the parietal lobes is to organize an integrative map
of our bodies in space, which is available for conscious reflection.
Thus, damage to the parietal lobes, especially on the right side,
results in a variety of disruptions in our experience of the self and
the world around us.

Although the left hemisphere seems to contain a network to monitor
attention on the right side of the body, the right hemisphere of
right-handers has a specialized ability to direct attention bilaterally
to both the right and left sides of "extrapersonal space" (Mesulam,
1981). Hemi-neglect, or the denial of the existence of the left side of
the body, can result from lesions to the right parietal lobe. When
neglect is severe, the patient behaves as if the left half of the world
has ceased to exist. Patients with hemi-neglect will dress and put
makeup only on the right side of their bodies while denying ownership of
their left arm or leg. Asked to draw the face of a clock, they may put
all 12 numbers on the right side or simply stop at 6 o'clock. The
phenomenon of hemi-neglect has also been shown to exist in imaginary
space. Bisiach and Luzzatti (1978) examined two patients with right
parietal injuries and left-sided neglect who were asked to describe the
Piazza del Duomo in Milan. The piazza was very familiar to both
patients. But when asked to imagine the piazza from one end, they could
recall and describe the details on their imagined right side and not
their left. Later, they were asked to reimagine the piazza from the
other end. Looking back to where they previously pictured themselves
sitting, they were now able to accurately describe what was on the right
side but not on the left. In other words, once they imagined turning
around 180 degrees, they now had access to memories that they were
unable to remember just a short while earlier. Further, the information
they provided previously was no longer accessible. This remarkable
demonstration suggests neural networks that organize and attend to the
body in space are also utilized in imagination. In later research,
Bisiach and his colleagues (Bisiach, Rusconi, & Vallar, 1991; Cappa,
Sterzi, Vallar, & Bisiach, 1987; Vallar, Sterzi, Bottini, Cappa, &
Rusconi, 1990) found that vestibular stimulation via cold water
irrigation of the left ear (the caloric test) in patients with right
parietal lobe lesions resulted in temporary remission of their left
hemi-neglect. Putting cold water into the left inner ear stimulated
areas within the right temporal lobe and caused the patients to orient
toward the left (Friberg, Olsen, Roland, Paulsen, & Lassen, 1985).
Although the mechanism of action is not certain, one possible
explanation could be that activation of the right temporal lobe resulted
in a reintegration of right and left hemispheric attentional processes,
bringing the world temporarily into an organized whole (Rubens, 1985).
This theory is supported by the fact that being shown fearful faces also
appears to overcome the attentional neglect of these patients (Tamietto

et al., 2007). The survival value of these faces may surpass a higher
threshold established in the hemi-neglect phenomenon. The Language
Network and the Left Hemisphere Interpreter All men are frauds. The only
difference between them is that some admit it. I myself deny it. ---H.
L. Mencken The left hemisphere language network relies on the
convergence of auditory, visual, and sensory information from the
temporal, occipital, and parietal lobes. Wernicke's area in the temporal
lobe receives input from the primary auditory area and organizes it into
meaningful bits of information. The convergence zone connects sounds,
sights, and touch, so that crossmodal connections can be made, allowing
us to name things we touch and hear without visual cues. It is also
necessary for the development of sign language, where words take the
form of gestures. This sophisticated and highly processed information
projects forward to Broca's area where expressive speech is organized.
Neural networks linking language areas to the rest of the frontal lobes
allow both spoken and internal language to guide behavior and regulate
affect. Although the semantic aspects of language are usually
lateralized to the left hemisphere, the right contributes the emotional
and prosodic element of speech. The integrative properties of language
may be unequaled by any other function of the brain. Creating and
recalling a story requires the convergence of multisensory emotional,
temporal, and memory capabilities that bridge all vectors of neural
networks. In this way, language integrates, organizes, and regulates the
brain, and is therefore used to great benefit in everyday storytelling
as well as in psychotherapy. Consistent findings across a variety of
settings have led to a general acceptance that the verbal neocortex
organizes conscious experience and embodies the social self as arbiter
of rules, expectations, and social presentation (Nasrallah, 1985; Ross
et al., 1994). Working with split-brain patients, Gazzaniga and his
colleagues found that the left hemisphere could create an explanation of
experience when right hemisphere information was unavailable (Gazzaniga,
LeDoux, & Wilson, 1977). Gazzaniga (1989) later developed the concept of
the left hemisphere interpreter that synthesizes

available information and generates a coherent narrative for the
conscious social self. The strategy of filling in gaps in experience and
memory, and making a guess at an explanation, parallels confabulatory
processes seen in patients with psychosis, dementia, and other forms of
brain damage. Confabulation appears to be a reflexive function of the
left hemisphere interpreter as it attempts to make sense of nonsense,
organize experience, and present the self in the best possible light.
This phenomenon is likely related to Freudian defense mechanisms that
distort reality in order to reduce anxiety. A good example of this kind
of confabulatory behavior was demonstrated by S.M., a 77-year-old
suffering from parietal and temporal lobe atrophy in her right
hemisphere. One day her son saw her using sign language in front of the
mirror in her bedroom (Feinberg & Shapiro, 1989). When asked what she
was doing, the patient told him that she was communicating with the
"other S.M." She went on to tell him that there was another S.M. who was
identical to her in appearance, age, background, and education who was
always in the mirror. She and the other S.M. had gone to the same
school, but did not know each other from that time. The other S.M. also
had a son with the same name who looked just like him. S.M. and her
double were identical in every respect, except that the other S.M. had a
tendency to talk too much and did not communicate as well as she did in
sign language. If her son or the examiner appeared behind her in the
mirror, she would correctly label that person's mirror reflection. Thus,
the phenomenon of a double was only evident for her own image. When it
was pointed out that this was her own image in the mirror, she would
reply, "Oh sure, that's what you think" (Feinberg & Shapiro, 1989,
Chapter 3). While S.M.'s comprehension and identification of herself and
the world had been disrupted by her right hemisphere lesion, her left
hemisphere interpreter remained intact. It is somewhat comical to think
that she experienced her reflection in the mirror as talking too much
and being less skilled than herself in sign language. Perhaps the left
hemisphere interpreter may explain why we are all above average in our
own minds. This confabulatory and positive self-bias of S.M. versus her
reflection is a perfect example of the left hemisphere interpreter at
work. It also reflects the brain's basic instinct to engage in
explanatory behavior for things it cannot understand. Some version of
the interpreter concept has previously been used to explain the
development of paranormal beliefs (Cozolino,

1997), schizophrenic delusions (Maher, 1974), and religious beliefs
(Gazzaniga, 1995). The concept is especially relevant to psychotherapy,
because the construction of reality is at work in the worldviews of
patients with character disorders, the defense mechanisms of neurotics,
and the dayto-day reality of healthy individuals. The left hemisphere
interpreter is an internal press agent for the self, putting a positive
spin on what is experienced and how it is presented to others. If the
interpreter is not doing its job adequately, as in the case of left
hemisphere damage or decreased activation of the left frontal cortex, we
can become realistic, pessimistic, and depressed. Communication and
Coordination Between the Hemispheres Is the brain, which is notably
double in structure, a double organ, "seeming parted, but yet a union in
partition"? ---H. Maudsley As our left and right hemispheres
differentiated during evolution, each came to gain dominance for
specific functions after failed experiments with transcortical democracy
(Levy, Trevarthan, & Sperry, 1972). At the same time, the blending of
the strengths of each hemisphere allows for the maximum integration of
our cognitive and emotional functioning. When we are awake, the right
hemisphere constantly provides information to the left. Nasrallah (1985)
suggested that this input relates to intuition, feelings, fantasy, and
visual images. The momentary bubbling up of feelings or images, which
are then quickly lost, may reflect one aspect of the intrusion of right
hemisphere processing into left hemisphere control. The filtration of
right hemispheric processes may be necessary to allow us to remain
focused on the tasks in which we are engaged, although it may not
necessarily register, understand, or allow the information into
consciousness. What happens when the hemispheres find themselves
disconnected from one another? Jason and Pajurkova (1992) reported a
case of a 41-yearold right-handed man who suffered damage to the front
portion of his corpus callosum and the medial portion of his frontal
cortex. The most salient aspect of his behavior after his injury was
that the two sides of his body seemed to be in conflict with one
another. During neuropsychological

testing, the patient's right hand would attempt to perform a task but
the left would move in and disrupt what had been accomplished. When he
would try to go down a set of stairs, his right foot would lead but then
his left hand would grab the doorjamb and refuse to let him move
forward. He found himself unable to do things that required the
cooperation of both hands. The patient said, "My left foot and my left
hand want to do the opposite of what my right one does all the time"
(Jason & Pajurkova, Chapter 13). On another occasion he stated, "My left
hand doesn't go where I want it to" (Chapter 13). In each situation, the
right hand and side (controlled by the left hemisphere) attempted to
carry out the conscious will of the patient. But the left side
(controlled by the right hemisphere) would have no part of it. The
authors reported that it seemed as if the right hemisphere was acting
like a spiteful sibling, competing for attention and control (Jason &
Pajurkova, 1992). Although this conflictual behavior decreased over
time, it was still evident 6 months after the injury. Similar
left--right conflicts, usually resolving in the first few weeks after
surgery, have also been reported in split-brain patients. It is clear in
these cases that the left hemisphere is experienced as the conscious
self (ego) while the behavior of the right hemisphere is experienced as
a force from outside the self (ego-alien). The experience and behavior
of such patients suggests not only alternate ways of processing
information in each hemisphere, but also two separate wills. The
unconscious and oppositional quality of the behavior of this client's
right hemisphere suggests that the left hand may have been acting out
unconscious emotional reactions. Right-Left Integration and
Psychopathology We use our brains too little and when we do, it is only
to make excuses for our reflexes and instincts. ---Martin Fischer I
postulated earlier that neural network integration should correlate with
mental health, while dissociation or imbalance among neural networks
should correlate with mental illness. If this is true, we can assume
that integration between the right and left hemispheres is one element
of optimal brain functioning. It turns out that anxiety, affective
disorders, psychosis,

alexithymia, and psychosomatic conditions have all been linked to
deficits in the integration and balance among the cerebral hemispheres.
Anxiety and Depression Anxiety is love's greatest killer... ---Anaïs Nin
As mentioned earlier, each hemisphere has an emotional bias, and so it
appears that the proper balance of right-left activation allows us to
experience a healthy mix of positive and negative emotional experiences,
as well as to regulate and manage anxiety (Silberman & Weingartner,
1986). The left hemisphere has a bias toward positive affect, prosocial
behavior, and assertiveness, all of which help us to connect with others
and find safety in the group, while the right hemisphere's bias toward
suspiciousness and negativity keeps us vigilant and alert to danger.
Frontal lobe activation, when biased toward the right hemisphere,
correlates with the signs and symptoms of depression (Nikolaenko,
Egorov, & Freiman, 1997). The same phenomenon holds true for anxiety.
Primates with extreme right frontal activity are more fearful and
defensive, and have higher levels of stress hormones, than do those with
activity biased toward the left hemisphere (Kalin et al., 1998). Adults
with a history of childhood trauma demonstrate a significantly greater
shift to right hemispheric processing when asked to think about
unpleasant memories (Schiffer, Teicher, & Papanicolaou, 1995).
Activation of many structures of the right hemisphere is also evident
during posttraumatic flashbacks (Rauch et al., 1996). If anxiety and
depression are, in part, the result of a bias toward right hemisphere
processing, then any form of successful treatment will enhance a
rebalancing of these systems. Cognitive therapies for both anxiety and
depression utilize rational thought that may work by activating left
hemisphere processes to regain lateral balance. Symptomatic relief can
also be achieved by a downregulation of the right hemisphere processes
through relaxation training. An unfortunate artifact of the evolution of
laterality may be that the right hemisphere is biased toward negative
emotions while also having primary control over emotional self-awareness
(Keenan et al., 1999). In

addition, because there is so much early, unconscious right hemisphere
emotional learning, early negative experiences have a long-lasting yet
hidden impact on our self-esteem, attitudes, and personalities. These
aspects of laterality may create a bias toward shame, guilt, and
pessimism while possibly explaining the neurobiological mechanism
underlying Nietzsche's statement that "Man is the only animal who has to
be encouraged to live." Alexithymia and Psychosomatic Illness It is
precisely because a child's feelings are so strong that they cannot be
repressed without serious consequences. ---Alice Miller
Alexithymia---the inability to consciously experience and describe
feelings ---is characterized by deficits in the awareness and
integration of right hemisphere functions. These patients are not prone
to depression or mania but instead have a poverty of emotional
expression and experience. They are able to recognize that others have
feelings, but report being unable to locate any within themselves. From
a psychodynamic perspective, these patients seem trapped in secondary
process thinking, disconnected from their inner physical and emotional
worlds. Patients with alexithymia are described as having a concrete or
stimulus-bound cognitive style, restricted imagination, and a lack of
memory for dreams (Bagby & Taylor, 1997). They have difficulty
benefiting from traditional modes of talk therapy because of their
inability to bring emotions into the session, or to use imagination or
role-playing to expand their thinking about themselves. Although the
neurological correlates of this disorder are still unknown, alexithymia
has been described as a "bidirectional interhemispheric transfer
deficit" (Taylor, 2000). The resultant failure of the integration of
affect and cognition leaves the conscious self of the left hemisphere
with little input from the emotional, intuitive, and imaginative right.
Patients with other psychiatric disorders reveal patterns similar to
those with alexithymia. Hoppe (1977) found that patients with
psychosomatic disorders have characteristics similar to those with
alexithymia such as impoverished dreams, a paucity of symbolic thinking,
and trouble putting feelings into words. Similar difficulties were also
found in Holocaust

survivors, split-brain patients, and individuals with traumatic brain
injuries. Hoppe and Bogen (1977) hypothesized that problems during
development or underlying genetic processes could lead hemispheres to
organize and function autonomously. The theory of such an
"interhemispheric transfer deficit" was supported by research with
patients suffering from PTSD and alexithymia who were found to have
deficits in transferring sensorimotor information between hemispheres
(Zeitlin, Lane, O'Leary, & Schrift, 1989). Psychosis Reality is merely
an illusion, albeit a very persistent one. ---Albert Einstein Whereas
normal states of awareness are comprised of an integration and balance
of right and left hemisphere processing, psychosis may be a result of
the intrusion of right hemisphere functioning into conscious awareness.
Hyperactivation of the right hemisphere, or a decrease in the inhibitory
capacities of the left, may diminish the ability to filter primary
process input from the right hemisphere. This shift in right-left bias
may occur for many reasons, including changes in levels of important
neurochemicals such as dopamine, neuroanatomical abnormalities, or
changing activation in subcortical brain areas such as the thalamus.
Schizophrenic patients and their close relatives demonstrate reduced
left hemisphere volumes in the hippocampus and the amygdala, which has
been shown to correlate with thought disorder (Seidman et al., 1999;
Shenton et al., 1992). Auditory hallucinations, or hearing one or more
voices talking, are a core symptom of schizophrenia. In fact, the term
schizophrenia means split mind. These aberrant, intrusive, and
ego-dystonic experiences may reflect right hemisphere language (related
to primary process thinking and/or implicit memories) breaking into left
hemisphere awareness. These voices, often heard as single words with
strong emotional value, are experienced as coming from outside the self.
For example, patients report hearing profanities or critical words
(jerk, idiot) as people walk by them on the street. Command
hallucinations to hurt oneself or others or to engage in dangerous
behaviors have the same qualities. Schizophrenic patients appear to
openly struggle with shameful aspects of their inner world (likely
stored

in the right hemisphere) that the rest of us are better able to inhibit,
repress, and deny. In psychosis, primary process thinking breaks into
normal states of awareness to create what are diagnosed as deficits in
reality testing and thought disorders. Patients describe this as a
feeling of dreaming while awake and struggling to make sense of the
simultaneous superimposition of primary and secondary process
experiences. This attempt to make sense out of nonsense fires up the
left hemisphere interpreter, leading to the elaboration of bizarre
delusions (Maher, 1974). Although a hemispheric model of psychosis is
still speculative, tests of lateral dominance (measured by a listening
task) have shown that decreased lateral dominance in these patients
correlates with more severe psychotic symptoms (Wexler & Heninger,
1979). Inspired by both modern science and ancient texts, the
neuropsychologist Julian Jaynes (1976) developed a theory of the
evolution of human consciousness based on the increasing ability of the
left hemisphere to inhibit input from the right. Jaynes argued that
prior to 1000 B.C., the two halves of the human brain acted
independently; the right hemisphere unconsciously controlled the body,
while the left witnessed and described the social environment and
actions of the body. This model of laterality may have reflected an
intermediate evolutionary stage between having two modes of conscious
awareness and our current bias toward right hemisphere inhibition.
Jaynes suggested that when our forebears were in situations of extreme
stress, such as combat, the right hemisphere provided auditory commands
to the left, which were experienced as coming from outside the self.
This could reflect an internalized auditory memory of the tribal leaders
and warriors, commands similar to those reported by modern-day
schizophrenics. With the expansion of the corpus callosum and increasing
dominance of the left hemisphere, a more unified sense of self grounded
in the left hemisphere has become dominant and able to inhibit these
inner voices. Jaynes felt that psychotic symptoms seen in patients in
modern times may be the result of a breakdown of the left hemisphere's
capacity to inhibit these messages from the right. Laterality and
Psychotherapy

Happiness is not a matter of intensity but of balance, order, rhythm and
harmony. ---Thomas Merton The proper balance and integration of the
right and left hemispheres does not appear to be a given in the course
of development. I strongly suspect that left-right integration is an
experience-dependent process that relies on adequate assistance with
affect regulation through secure attachment. It is also dependent on the
co-construction of narratives where a model is presented for the
recognition and labeling of feelings, as well as integrating them into
experience. Psychotherapy can serve as a means to reintegrate the
patient's disconnected hemispheres through reality testing, emotional
expression, and putting words to feelings in the context of a caring
relationship. Examples from psychiatry and neurology strongly suggest
that psychological health is related to the proper balance of
activation, inhibition, and integration of systems biased toward the
left and right hemispheres. Genetic and neuroanatomical factors can
combine with early neglect or trauma to interfere with the development
of optimal neural network integration and regulation. The similarity
between hemispheric specialization and Freud's notion of the conscious
and unconscious mind has not been lost on psychotherapists. Right
hemisphere functions are similar to Freud's model of the unconscious in
that they develop first and are emotional, nonverbal, and sensorimotor
(Galin, 1974). This nonlinear mode of processing allows the right
hemisphere to contain multiple overlapping realities, similar to Freud's
primary process thinking most clearly demonstrated in dreams. The linear
processing of conscious thought in the left hemisphere parallels Freud's
concept of secondary process, which is bound by time, reality, and
social constraints. When patients come to therapy, the left hemisphere
interpreter tells its story. But something is usually wrong: the story
does not fully account for what is happening in their lives. The
narratives that organize their identities inadequately account for their
experiences, feelings, and behaviors. The right hemisphere also speaks
via facial expressions, body language, emotions, and attitudes. Thus, we
listen to both stories for the congruence between the verbal narrative,
and nonverbal and emotional communication. In this process, we analyze
the integration and coherence of left-right and

top-down neural networks. A primary tool across all models of therapy is
editing and expanding the self-narrative of the left hemisphere to
include the silent wisdom of the right. Hopefully, the therapist will be
better integrated than the client in a therapeutic relationship. This
will allow the therapist to react to what is said with emotion, resonate
with the client's emotions, and then share thoughts about those emotions
with the client. Thus, the therapist's ability to traverse the colossal
bridge between his or her own right and left hemispheres serves as a
model and guide for the client. Another way of describing therapy from
the perspective of laterality is that we teach clients a method by which
they can learn to attend to and translate right hemisphere processing
into left hemisphere language. We teach them about the limitations and
distortions of their own conscious beliefs presented by their left
hemisphere interpreter. Many clients need to be suspicious of the ideas
that their left hemispheres offer them. This is why reality testing is
so important for treatment success. It is the therapist's job to hear
what is not said, resonate with what the client is unable to consciously
experience, and communicate it back to him or her in a way that will
allow it to become integrated. This human process serves hemispheric
integration. Summary The integration of dissociated processing systems
is often a central focus of treatment. Gradually, clients come to learn
how the therapist gathers and interprets the information presented to
them (Gedo, 1991). This process closely parallels what is done during
positive interactions with parents during childhood. If the method
taught during childhood is maladaptive, it leaves the child (and later
the adult) in a state of limited self-awareness and neural network
dissociation. The learning of these skills in therapy occurs in the
context of emotional and cognitive integration, requiring the
participation of both hemispheres, reflective language, feelings,
sensations, and behaviors. In the language of neuroscience, we are
integrating dissociated systems of memory and processing systems by
teaching new strategies for integrating rational and emotional
information. These processes aid in the construction of a more inclusive
self-narrative, which, in turn, serves as a blueprint for ongoing neural
integration.

OceanofPDF.com

Part III.

The Organization of Experience and the Healthy Brain

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 7

The Executive Brain My own brain is to me the most unaccountable of
machinery--- always buzzing, humming, soaring roaring diving, and then
buried in mud. And why? What's this passion for? ---Virginia Woolf
Through countless adaptational challenges and the process of natural
selection, we find ourselves with staggeringly intricate and
sophisticated brains: Ferraris---not Fords. Ancient networks have been
conserved, expanded, and reorganized, while new networks have emerged
and combined to perform increasingly complex functions. In the process,
some executive functions remained with earlier evolving networks, and
some moved up to frontal and prefrontal regions, while still others were
assumed by the mind and the social group. The control of the vast
majority of our bodily and mental functions is on automatic pilot. Under
normal circumstances, we pay virtually no attention to breathing,
walking, talking, and thousands of other complex processes. We can drive
a car safely (and mindlessly) for hours while conversing and listening
to music. All of this automaticity allows us to focus our conscious
attention on just a small fraction of what is happening at any given
moment. The executive cortical areas in our prefrontal lobes are some of
the latest neural systems to evolve and the slowest to develop during
childhood and adolescence. In many respects these systems continue to
develop throughout life, allowing the potential for increasing
perspective, compassion, and wisdom. The executive brain contains the
control mechanisms that enable us to attend to a particular activity,
filter out distractions, make decisions, and act in an organized and
purposeful way. If these functions are carried out successfully, we feel
calm and safe enough to

turn our attention inward for contemplation, imagination, and
selfawareness. These capabilities, in turn, create the possibility for
art, religion, philosophy, and other uniquely human endeavors. Think for
a moment of a large corporation with a CEO at the top of its executive
hierarchy. Lower level managers, who specialize in particular areas of
operation, are employed by the corporation to control thousands of
diverse functions. Utilizing multiple lower level executives frees the
CEO to monitor market forces, keep an eye on the competition, and plan
for the future. Just as a CEO is freed from the everyday concerns of
production, building maintenance, and bill paying, the executive areas
of the cerebral cortex are freed from attention to basic bodily
functions, well-learned motor behavior, and visual-spatial organization.
The executive brain participates in more basic functions only in
situations that are novel and problematic. Although the executive areas
of the brain are traditionally thought of as being responsible for our
rational abilities, they actually combine sensory, motor, memory, and
emotional information to shape ideas, plans, and actions. This broader
view of executive functioning has been guided, in part, by an increasing
appreciation of the contribution of emotion and intuition in decision
making (Damasio, 1994). Because so much of brain functioning is
unconscious, nonverbal, and hidden from conscious observation, the
executive brain is also strongly influenced by nonconscious processes.
Psychotherapy calls on the executive brain to update and reorganize the
relationship among the conscious and unconscious networks they oversee
in the service of mental and physical health. For the purpose of the
present discussion, we will focus primarily on the executive functions
of the frontal and prefrontal cortices. What we know about these areas
is based on a combination of primate and human research, naturalistic
observations, and clinical evidence with human patients. Although the
focus here is on the frontal and prefrontal cortices, we will return to
the idea of multiple executive regions in a later discussion of the
parietal lobes. The Frontal and Prefrontal Cortices The highest possible
stage in moral culture is when we recognize that we ought to control our
thoughts. ---Charles Darwin

The frontal and prefrontal cortices are the prime candidates for
behavioral and emotional executive functioning in primates and humans.
Their organization and connectivity provide for the integration of
cognitive and emotional processing (Fuster, 1997). Because there are no
primary sensory areas in the frontal cortex, they are entirely dedicated
to the association of information that has already been highly processed
in other neural systems throughout the brain (Nauta, 1971). For example,
projections from the parietal regions contain integrated visual, motor,
and vestibular information, whereas those from the temporal lobe have
already combined sensory information with socioemotional appraisal.
Although the human frontal lobes initially evolved to organize complex
motor behavior, the expansion of the prefrontal lobes added capacities
for planning, strategy, and working memory. Neurons and neural networks
within the frontal cortex organize our behavior through time (Fuster,
Bonder, & Kroger, 2000) by sustaining a memory for the future (Ingvar,
1985) that keeps in mind the eventual consequences of behaviors about to
be performed (Dolan, 1999; Watanabe, 1996). The ability to remember the
past and predict the future is essential for survival. Broca's area, in
the left frontal cortex, for example, which controls expressive speech,
is located adjacent to the area of the motor cortex dedicated to the
lips and tongue. This proximity reflects the coevolution and
interdependence of spoken language and fine motor control. Because of
the evolutionary links between motor behavior and cognition, some
theorists consider cognition to be a derivative of motor behavior
(Wilson, 1998). Support for this idea may exist in that much of our
symbolic and abstract thinking is organized by the visceral, sensory,
and motor metaphors that permeate our language (Johnson, 1987). As we
have seen, networks in both hemispheres feed highly processed
sensory-motor information forward to the frontal cortex. Simultaneously,
multiple hierarchical networks, which loop up and down through the
cortex, limbic system, and brainstem, provide the frontal cortex with
somatic and emotional information (Alexander et al., 1986). The
convergence of all of these networks within the frontal and prefrontal
lobes allows them to synthesize diverse information and coordinate our
attention, emotions, and cognition with action. The prefrontal cortex
also participates in constructing ideas about the beliefs, intentions,
and perspective of others in a process called theory of

mind (Goel, Grafman, Sadato, & Hallett, 1995; Stuss, Gallup, &
Alexander, 2001). Damage to the prefrontal cortex in early childhood
usually results in deficits in the development of theory of mind,
including learning social roles, perspective taking, and empathic
abilities (Dolan, 1999). Damage in the same areas later in life can also
result in deficits in these abilities, sometimes referred to as
pseudopsychopathy (Meyers, Berman, Scheibel, & Hayman, 1992). Because
empathy requires conceptual understanding, emotional attunement, and the
ability to regulate one's own affect, damage to any area of the
prefrontal cortex may impair different aspects of empathic behavior
(Eslinger, 1998). Empathic thinking requires both cognitive flexibility
and affect regulation in order to pull back from the environment, put
our current needs aside for the moment, and imagine the feelings of
others. The act of murder is the ultimate expression of a lack of
empathy. As a group, people who have committed murder demonstrate
significantly lower glucose metabolism in both dorsal and orbital
portions of the frontal areas. This finding exists in the absence of
indications of brain damage or decreased metabolism in other areas of
the brain (Raine et al., 1994). Although antisocial behavior is a
complex phenomenon, correlations exist between deficits in affect
regulation, impulse control, and the inability to relate to the
experience of others. The classic example of damage to the orbitomedial
prefrontal cortex (ompfc) is the case of Phineas Gage (Harlow, 1868;
Damasio, 1994). Mr. Gage was a young and well-respected New Hampshire
railroad foreman who was known for his maturity and "well-balanced"
mind. An accident on the job sent an inch-and-a-quarter-wide iron bar up
through his head, obliterating much of his ompfc. Although free of any
"neurobehavioral" deficits from the accident (such as aphasia,
paralysis, or sensory loss), his workmates reported that Gage was "no
longer Gage." After the accident he was unable to control his emotions,
sustain goal-oriented behavior, or adhere to social conventions. He went
from being a young man with a promising future to an aimless and
unsuccessful drifter. The Cortex and Inhibition What a man's mind can
create, man's character can control. ---Thomas A. Edison

When we think of the human cerebral cortex, we may think of the
accomplishments of music, art, and culture---products of cortical and
especially prefrontal evolution. Although we focus on these visible and
impressive products of the human brain, the hidden role of the cortex in
inhibiting itself and other brain structures is a vital aspect of the
brain's capabilities. Consider this example: we are born with a broad
array of primitive brainstem reflexes conserved from our primate
ancestors. One of these is the grasping reflex, which allows us to pick
up infants by putting our index fingers in their palms and lifting. For
the first few months of life infants can hold their own weight, after
which they are no longer able to hold on. It is believed that this
grasping reflex is a holdover from a time when newborn monkeys had to
hold onto their mothers' fur to free the mothers' hands to traverse
branches and gather food. So although this behavior is no longer
required for survival by humans, it has been conserved within our
genetic blueprint. The only possible role it may play for us is to
enhance the experience of bonding between newborn and parent. Many
parents are captivated and enthralled by the fact that their infant
grasps them and holds on so strongly. Over the first few months of life
this reflex gradually diminishes as descending fibers from the cerebral
cortex connect with the brainstem regions that trigger them. But why
does the cortex make this inhibitory process such an early priority?
After all there is so much to learn. The most likely reason is that
before the cortical motor areas can begin to shape the dexterity of the
hands and fingers, they need to be released from the control of this
primitive reflex. In other words, before we can move each of our fingers
independently and in coordination with each other, they need to be free
from the tendency to act together for a single purpose. Now fast forward
to later in life, when this same child is 60, 70, or 80 years old. Her
children notice that she seems forgetful and becomes disorganized from
time to time, and wonder if there may be something wrong. The family
doctor refers her to a neurologist who performs a series of clinical
tests. In one of these tests, the doctor asks her to hold her arms out
straight in front of her with her hands open and palms facing down.
Extending his arms under hers with his palms up, the doctor slides his
fingers under her arms from the elbows up towards her hands. As he
reaches her wrists, he curls his fingers slightly and holds them rigid.
As the doctor's fingers slide under the palms and then the fingers he is
looking to

see if the touch of his hand triggers her fingers to curl inward and
grasp his own. If they do, he will try it again after telling her not to
grasp his fingers. If it happens again, it is likely that the touch of
his hand is triggering the same brainstem grasping reflex that she
showed early in life. Why is this clinically significant? It turns out
that the reflexes in the newborn do not dissolve, but rather remain
embedded within the brainstem throughout life, and are continually
inhibited by descending fibers from the cortex. With diseases like
dementia, the neurons in the cortex gradually die off and the cortex
becomes increasingly compromised. So what the doctor is looking for are
signs of compromise of cortical inhibitory functioning suggestive of a
potential stroke, tumor, or the onset of dementia. Early reflexes that
reemerge after damage to the brain in adulthood are referred to as
cortical release signs (Chugani et al., 1987). This inhibitory cortical
function is not limited to primitive reflexes; it is in play when we are
able to keep ourselves from reacting in games of Simon Says when Simon
doesn't say, or hold our tongues in emotional situations where saying
something would only make things worse. A major neurobiological
component of secure attachment is the building of descending fibers from
orbital and medial regions of the prefrontal cortex down to the amygdala
and other limbic structures, which allow the child to first use parents
as emotional scaffolding for the regulation of fear, and later to be
able to regulate her own fear through self-talk, memory of positive
outcomes, and proactive problem solving (Ghashghaei, Hilgetag, & Barbas,
2007). The Prefrontal Cortex One of the most remarkable aspects of an
animal's behavior is the ability to modify that behavior by learning, an
ability that reaches its highest form in human beings. ---Eric Kandel
The prefrontal cortex is generally divided into two divisions; the first
consists of the orbital and medial regions (ompfc) and the second
comprises the dorsal and lateral areas (dlpfc). Although physically
contiguous, the orbitomedial and dorsolateral prefrontal areas differ in
their connectivity,

neural architecture, biochemistry, and function (Wilson, O'Scalaidhe, &
Goldman-Rakic, 1993). Research with primates has demonstrated that
although both areas play a role in inhibition and control, the dlpfc is
involved when the decision is attentional, and the ompfc when it
involves emotional information. The ompfc, first to evolve and first to
develop during childhood, sits at the apex of the limbic system and is
richly connected with subcortical networks of learning, memory, and
emotion (Barbas, 1995). These connections, and their bias toward the
right hemisphere, are associated with the extremes of emotional
processing. Like the right and left hemispheres with which they are
linked, the ompfc and dlpfc can demonstrate various degrees of
integration and dissociation. TABLE 7.1 Functions of the Prefrontal
Lobes Orbital and Medial Regions Attachment1 Social cognition2 Thinking
about a similar other3 Self-referential mental activity4 Appreciating
humor5 Encoding new information6 Sensory-visceral-motor linkage7
Estimating reward value and magnitude8 Sensitivity to future
consequences9 Achieving goals10 Stimulus-independent thought11
Inhibitory control in emotional processing12 Decisions based on
affective information13 Dorsal and Lateral Regions

Cognitive control14 Directing attention15 Organizing temporal
experience16 Organizing working memory17 Organizing episodic memory
(right)18 Voluntary suppression of sadness19 Learning motor sequences20
Decisions based on complex information21 Thinking about a dissimilar
other22 The integration of emotion and cognition23 The cognitive and
emotional intelligences in which they specialize have different
developmental timetables and learning contexts. Orbital and medial
prefrontal areas begin to organize emotional developmentin the context
of interpersonal relationships---from the first moments of life. During
the first 18 months of life, the ompfc shares a sensitive period of
development with the right hemisphere. Dorsolateral areas exhibit an
initial lag and then a growth spurt with the development of language and
the exploration of our physical and conceptual worlds. Our prefrontal
cortex has two overarching and interwoven areas of function, the
regulation of affect and attachments on the one hand, and the synthesis
and coordination of cognitive and motor processes on the other. Although
these two tasks seem quite different, each is dependent upon the other.
Abstract thinking and problem solving are particularly dependent on
adequate emotional regulation, which, in turn, can be accomplished by
using rational thought and problem solving. The prefrontal cortex also
appears necessary for metacognition---our ability to observe our stream
of consciousness, revisit memories, and think about our thinking, which
depends upon the integration of affect and cognition. We can observe an
array of functions in which the prefrontal lobes participate by
examining the kinds of problems that emerge when they are injured (see
Table 7.2). We can also see that different regions of the prefrontal
cortex specialize in different functions. With most traumatic

brain injuries, like the one suffered by Luis, whom you will soon hear
about, all of these areas are negatively impacted. On the other hand,
more localized lesions may result in some of these symptoms and not
others. Each psychiatric illness, too, has its characteristic profile of
cognitive distortions, difficulties with emotional regulation, and
deficits of selfawareness and self-monitoring reflective of different
patterns of frontal lobe involvement. Problem solving---which requires
emotional regulation, sustained attention, and cognitive
flexibility---is a central executive function that can become impaired
with frontal compromise. Some patients get stuck in a particular way of
thinking (perseveration), while others have difficulty utilizing
abstract concepts (concrete thinking). They may have difficulty in
remembering the outcome of past behaviors and repeatedly apply the same
unsuccessful solutions to new problems. Patients with frontal deficits
often have a difficult time monitoring social interactions, such as
keeping the listener's perspective in mind and abiding by social rules.
TABLE 7.2 Manifestations of Prefrontal Compromise Orbital and Medial
Regions

Dorsal and Lateral Regions

Social and Emotional Disinhibition Tactlessness or silly attitude
Decreased social concern Sexual exhibitionism and lewd conversation
Grandiosity Flare with anger and irritability Restlessness

Loss of Executive Function

Apathy Decreased attention Loss of initiative Lack of spontaneity

Loss of Abstract Attitude

Forgetfulness Distractibility Decreased memory for the future Decreased
anticipation Poor planning ability Deterioration of work quality
Concreteness Stimulus bound Loss of aesthetic sense

Indifference Depression

Perseveration Set stuckness

Luis The very essence of instinct is that it's followed independently of
reason. ---Charles Darwin Luis was in a serious auto accident a few days
after his 20th birthday. He and his parents came in to see me after his
neurologist suggested they all might benefit from family therapy. At the
time of their first appointment, I opened the door to find eight people
packed tightly into my small waiting room. As Luis, his parents, and
five younger siblings filed into my office, I noticed the scars and
indentations across Luis's forehead and imagined the damage beneath
them. I knew from talking with his neurologist that he had sustained
severe injuries to his prefrontal cortex and that he had become
impulsive, irritable, and occasionally violent. Luis now possessed
limited inhibitory capacity, reasoning abilities, and almost no ability
to be guided by social expectations. After we all settled in my office,
I turned to the father and asked how I could help him help his family.
He immediately became tearful, shook his head slowly from side to side,
and rubbed his hands together. "He drives too fast," he said quietly. "I
don't!" exclaimed Luis. "Except for that one time!" Everyone in the
family looked away and appeared embarrassed. It was immediately clear
that talking back to his father was part of the problem. Although he had
always been somewhat impulsive, his parents claimed that he was far
worse than before the accident. I suspected that no matter how impulsive
Luis might have been before the accident, this disrespectful behavior
was new. This effect of Luis's accident was apparent just a few seconds
into the session. As the family discussed their situation, I found out
that Luis's parents had moved to the United States from Mexico shortly
before his birth, and had adapted well to their new home. Despite their
successful acculturation, they remained true to traditional Mexican
values of loyalty to the family and respect for elders. In this context,
Luis's reflexive and loud

contradiction of his father was a source of shame for everyone except
Luis. His injury had damaged the networks that allowed him to monitor
and control his own behavior and take into account the expectations of
others. A year after the accident he returned to his auto repair job but
was unable to focus on his work or get along with coworkers and
customers. The descending networks of cortical inhibition had been
compromised through the loss of so many prefrontal neurons. Luis didn't
remember anything about his accident and, in fact, had no memory for the
weeks before or after the event. He read the police reports to discover
that he had lost control of his car while street racing and crashed into
a pole. His injuries were compounded by the fact that he was not wearing
a seat belt and had installed a steel steering wheel without an airbag.
Was this the foolishness of adolescence or evidence reflecting his lack
of judgment prior to the accident? His mother reported that he spent
most of his time at home with her, and that his behavior was erratic and
sometimes frightening. At times he would cry for no reason, yell at her
and the others, and jump in her car and race off. A few times, he went
into a rage and threw furniture around the house. He had also made
sexual statements and cursed using Jesus's name during the holidays,
upsetting everyone in the family. Family members were confused and torn
between their loyalty to Luis and their disgust with his behavior.
Automobile, industrial, and recreational accidents, as well as community
and domestic violence, all contribute to the increasing number of people
who experience traumatic brain injury. Because the frontal areas are
located directly behind the forehead, they are also most likely to be
damaged in fights and accidents. Although patients with head injuries
come from all walks of life, young males are disproportionately
represented. Their youthful impulsivity, risk taking, and lack of
judgment, all dependent on prefrontal and frontal lobe functioning, make
them more vulnerable to damaging these very regions. The massive
reorganization of prefrontal brain areas along with biochemical and
hormonal changes during adolescence likely contribute to these dangerous
behaviors (Spear, 2000). Many of these young men may have already had
frontal deficits or slowed frontal development prior to their accidents,
amplifying more typical adolescent risk taking. In this way, frontal
injuries often compound preexisting deficits of impulse control and
judgment, complicating treatment and recovery.

Treatment with Luis and his family was multifaceted. I began by
educating the entire family about the brain and Luis's particular
injuries. The specific information was less important than labeling his
behaviors as symptoms of his injury. I targeted in particular his
cursing and sexual statements, which were, in their minds, connected to
his character and spiritual health. By sharing case studies of others
with them, I was able to show that Luis's symptoms were part of a
pattern of pathological disinhibition related to his brain damage and
not the result of moral lapses or bad parenting. More specific
interventions included enrolling Luis in an occupational therapy program
to help him develop the instrumental and interpersonal skills needed to
obtain and maintain employment. As the oldest son, it was important for
him and the rest of the family that he be productive and regain a sense
of self-worth. One of my goals was to reduce his resistance to taking
medication that would help him with his anxiety and depression caused by
his changed circumstances. I also worked with Luis and his family to
develop skills related to stress reduction and anger management. We
turned these exercises into family role-playing games that alleviated
tension and allowed everyone to participate in helping Luis. Over time,
Luis was able to apply his knowledge of cars to a part-time job in an
auto parts store. His occupational therapist helped him establish
routines that allowed him to successfully use the computer.
Antidepressants proved helpful with both his mood and irritability, and
the role-playing games became woven into the family's everyday
interactions. All of these improvements made the occasional outbursts
more tolerable and more easily seen as part of his illness. Luis was so
very fortunate to have the unquestioning love and support of a strong
and involved family. The Orbitomedial Prefrontal Cortex Opinion is
ultimately determined by the feelings, and not by the intellect.
---Herbert Spencer Tucked under and between the lobes of the frontal
cortex and sitting directly above the eyes, the ompfc is densely
connected to the anterior cingulate, amygdala, and other structures of
the basal forebrain (Heimer et

al., 2008; Zahm, 2006). These networks are of special interest to
psychotherapists because they both generate and regulate emotion and
attachment (Kern et al., 2008; Levesque et al., 2004; Rogers et al.,
2004; Wager et al., 2008; Walton et al., 2003). The anterior
cingulate---involved with attention, reward-based learning, and
autonomic arousal---first appeared during evolution in animals
demonstrating maternal behavior, nursing, and play (Devinsky, Morrell, &
Vogt, 1995; MacLean, 1985; Shima & Tanji, 1998). Consequently, damage to
either the ompfc or the anterior cingulate results in deficits of
maternal behavior, emotional functioning, and empathy. As described
earlier, disorders of emotional control are also seen with damage to
these regions, including inappropriate social behavior, impulsiveness,
sexual disinhibition, and increased motor activity (Price, Daffner,
Stowe, & Mesulam, 1990). The ompfc is vital for appraisal---interpreting
complex social events and linking them with their emotional value via
connections to the amygdala and other subcortical structures. A good
example of this is the ability of the ompfc to modulate the amygdala's
reaction to fearful faces based on the context in which the faces are
presented (Hariri, Bookheimer, & Mazziotta, 2000). So while the amygdala
will alert us to the sight of an angry face, the ompfc will include
information about additional environmental variables and information
based on past learning. If the ompfc recognizes the face as that of a
feared predator, the fight-or-flight response will be activated. If the
ompfc adds that it is the face of a distressed baby, we may approach the
child to find out what is wrong and if there is something we can do to
help. Damage to either the amygdala or ompfc at any time during life can
result in an inability to organize vital social information in a useful
manner, resulting in deficits in communication and connection. Research
has demonstrated that the ompfc also calculates the magnitude of reward
or punishment value of our behavior such as approaching another for help
and winning or losing money while gambling. Estimating reward value is a
joint operation between the ompfc and the amygdala (Dolan, 2007;
Gottfried, O'Doherty, & Dolan, 2003). Much of this analysis occurs out
of conscious awareness and is commonly called intuition. Those of us who
are good at "reading" people or gambling might just be aware of having a
feeling about a particular decision. In actuality, basal forebrain and
somatosensory areas work together to appraise huge amounts of

information that provide us with this feeling about what to do even if
it is sometimes contrary to our conscious logic (Damasio, 1994). The
Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex Two things control men's nature, instinct
and experience. ---Blaise Pascal The dorsal and lateral regions of the
prefrontal cortex (dlpfc) integrate information from the senses, the
body, and memory to organize and guide behavior. The dlpfc performs a
variety of functions, including directing attention, organizing working
memory, learning motor sequences, and organizing temporal experience
(Fuster, 2004). The dlpfc is the latest developing region of the cortex
and continues to mature into the third decade of life. This gradual
maturation of neural networks is vital to attention and judgment. It can
be tracked by looking at the increasing complexity of school curricula
and later through the slow decline of automobile insurance rates from
the teens into the 30s. The role of the dlpfc in interacting and coping
with the environment is highlighted by the reduced spontaneity and
flattened affect seen when they are damaged. A component of the
integration of top-down, cortical, and limbic processing occurs in the
communication between the ompfc and the dlpfc. The bias of these regions
toward the right and left hemispheres respectively allows them to also
support the integration of the left and right cerebral cortices. In
addition, the dorsal and lateral areas of the frontal cortex evolved to
network with the hippocampus while the medial regions became densely
interwoven with the amygdala. Thus, the communication among prefrontal
regions provides pathways of integration for the hippocampal and
amygdaloid memory systems described earlier. Emotion and higher
cognition can be integrated, i.e., at some point of processing,
functional specialization is lost, and emotion and cognition conjointly
and equally contribute to the control of thought and behavior. (Gray et
al., 2002, p. 4115) Like a tennis doubles team, the ompfc and the dlpfc
depend on one another's performance for optimal functioning. If the
ompfc is not doing an

adequate job regulating amygdala activation, heightened levels of
autonomic arousal will interfere with dlpfc-directed cognitive processes
(Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006). This is why we may have difficulties in
comprehending and solving even the most basic problems when we are
frightened or distraught. On the other hand, if the dlpfc is not
properly processing and managing environmental demands, the resultant
anxiety will overtax and eventually disrupt emotional regulation. In
essence, both inner and outer worlds need to be balanced and adequately
regulated for optimal functioning. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder Thinking is the momentary dismissal of irrelevancies.
---Buckminster Fuller Jimmy, an elfin 8-year-old, was referred to me to
assess whether or not he had attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). Before meeting him, I read notes from his parents, teachers, and
soccer coach that described his behavior. All agreed he was more
distracted and energetic than other children his age. His coach noted
Jimmy's inability to stay focused on the game; one teacher described him
as a bundle of energy; his father wrote, in big letters, "Exhausting!"
Jimmy's restlessness and impulsivity made it difficult for other kids to
interact with him, and his mother felt he was becoming isolated as his
peers sought calmer company. I walked into the testing room to find
Jimmy's mother slumped in a chair with her face in her hands. She did
not react when I entered the room and I wondered if she might be crying.
I scanned the room, looked behind the chair and small sofa, but could
not see Jimmy anywhere. Before I could speak, Jimmy shouted, "I'm up
here!!" Startled, I looked up and saw him perched on top of a six-foot
storage unit. I saw his mother momentarily pick up her head, roll her
eyes, and lower it back down into her hands. She wasn't crying, just
overwhelmed. It was clear that while making a diagnosis might not be
difficult, getting through the assessment process would require stamina
and patience. Jimmy did have ADHD, with the same symptoms his father had
when he was a boy. ADHD does sometimes run in families. Apparently, his
father still suffered from many symptoms of distractibility and
restlessness that

created difficulties in his work and relationships. After many failed
career attempts, he found considerable success in real estate. The
constant movement and transient relationships utilized his energy and
personality, while his choice of a business partner---who excelled at
handling the details of his sales---protected him from his deficits in
attention. Being a stable husband and father, however, proved more
problematic. The treatment for Jimmy included behavioral therapy to help
with his attention and social skills, martial arts classes, and
stimulant medications. These and other interventions were designed to
boost frontal functioning through biochemical and behavioral
interventions (social skills and teaching him to stop and think), and by
giving him constructive avenues through which to channel his
considerable energy. Individuals like Jimmy who suffer from ADHD are
characterized by an inability to sustain attention and inhibit
extraneous impulses, thoughts, and behaviors. These individuals can be
easily lost in daydreams or be in constant motion. They are also in
danger of leaping before they look. In fact, Jimmy had been injured a
year earlier when he raced into a neighbor's backyard and jumped into
the pool before noticing it had been drained for repair. Since
Satterfield and Dawson (1971) first pointed to a dysfunction of
frontal-limbic circuitry, ADHD has been understood to be a disorder of
executive control. The common explanation from psychiatrists to parents
is that their children have a lag in frontal lobe development that
results in a disinhibition of impulses from lower in the brain and
difficulties with tasks which require sustained attention. They are also
told that there is a good chance their child will "grow out of it" as
the frontal lobes mature. In the meantime, stimulant medications will
turbocharge these lagging frontal regions, allowing for more functional
behavior. While this is a good anecdotal explanation, the underlying
mechanisms and the etiology of ADHD are likely much more complicated.
Functional imaging research comparing ADHD to non-ADHD subjects reveals
a variety of patterns of higher and lower levels of activation
throughout the brain. And like most psychiatric disorders, ADHD is
heterogeneous and emerges from a spectrum of genetic, biological, and
interpersonal factors (Sun et al., 2005). It is likely that the
explanations of the causes and treatments of the disorder lie within
hierarchical networks between the attentional and inhibitory circuitry
of the frontal and parietal cortex, and subcortical networks in the
striatum and cerebellum that trigger

and organize motor behavior. It is unwise, however, to necessarily posit
these deficits in the frontal lobe because complex behaviors rely on
farreaching circuitry that can demonstrate similar dysfunctions
regardless of where in the network the problems exist (Seidman, Valera &
Makris, 2005; Willcutt et al., 2005). Stimulant medications (such as
Ritalin) may be working on the frontal lobes, the striatum (Vaidya et
al., 1998), the cerebellum (Anderson et al., 2002), or more systemically
by boosting general levels of dopamine and norepinephrine (Arnsten,
2000; Arnsten & Li, 2005). All we can be sure of is that it is
rebalancing this hierarchical circuitry in a way that decreases motor
agitation while enhancing attention. Because the brain works in
interactive networks, the safest working hypothesis at this point is
that there is a problem in the hierarchical neural networks that both
activate and regulate behavior and attention (Durston et al., 2003; Lee
et al., 2005; Rubia et al., 1999). Think of playing a game of Simon
Says. Simon Says tests our abilities to respond to the command while
monitoring and inhibiting our behavior based on whether or not Simon
says. The winner will be someone with well developed, balanced, and
integrated bottom-up networks of motor responses and top-down networks
of inhibitory control. When we hear a command in the absence of the
words, "Simon says," we feel our body react and the tension of
inhibition as we exert control to stop ourselves. The popularity of this
game with small children reflects the development of these systems as
well as a way to exercise voluntary control over impulses. When
individuals with ADHD engage in tasks similar to Simon Says, they show a
lower level of activity in the usual cortical areas dedicated to
inhibition and instead rely on a more diffuse and less effective group
of neural structures as compensatory mechanisms (Durston et al., 2003;
Schulz et al., 2004; Zang et al., 2005). Children with ADHD have
difficulties in organizing their behavior when they are confronted with
situations that require them to inhibit motor responses and sustain
attention to addressing complex tasks. Thus, they have difficulties in
learning, which requires attending to and recalling verbal material,
complex problem solving, and planning. They require much more motivation
to maintain attention, and so they often excel at video games, which
capture their attention and for which their ability to shift attention
serves them well.

Our understanding of the brains of individuals with ADHD is still
limited, and a variety of findings have emerged from research using
various imaging techniques (Bush, Valera, & Seidman, 2005). Table 7.3
lists some of the studies that point to an array of differences between
ADHD and nonADHD individuals using different measurement methods. The
best guess at this point is that individuals diagnosed with ADHD likely
reflect a number of subgroups with different types of brain involvement.
They suffer from a number of different processes reflected in the size,
shape, and function of their brains. The usual cortical systems of
attentional control and inhibition appear compromised while other
networks attempt to compensate. Subcortical structures involved in motor
movements are also affected in ways that result in greater but less
organized impact on experience and behavior. TABLE 7.3
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) Decreased Activation In Parietal attentional systems1
Anterior-mid cingulate cortex2 Supplemental motor area3 Right middle
prefrontal cortex4 Right inferior frontal cortex, left sensorimotor
cortex and bilateral cerebellum lobes and vermis5 Increased Activation
In Left temporal gyrus6 Basal ganglia, insula, cerebellum7 Right
anterior cingulate cortex8 Regional Cerebral Blood Flow (rCBF)
Hypoperfusion or Decreased Activation White matter regions of the
frontal lobes and caudate nuclei9 Hyperperfusion or Increased Activation

Right striatum and somatosensory area10 Brain Morphology Smaller
cerebral and cerebellar volume11 Smaller right prefrontal and caudate
volume12 Reduction of left cortical convolutional complexity in boys13
Cortical thinning in adults in right parietal, dorsolateral, and
anterior cingulate areas---all involved with attentional control14 Loss
of cerebellar volume15 Decreased frontal and cerebellar white matter
density16 Lastly, I want to mention a phenomenon I have witnessed
repeatedly over the years---children who are diagnosed with ADHD and
treated with medication but are better described as using a manic
defense to cope with overwhelming anxiety. An assessment of the
psychological state of the household---parental relationship, parental
psychopathology, emotional context of siblings and extended family,
external stressors, and so on, can all go a long way in sorting out a
proper diagnosis. Chronic stress negatively impacts frontal lobe
functioning and can result in memory impairment, poor impulse control,
and deficits of attention (Birnbaum et al., 1999). Summary Executive
functioning is a complex evolutionary accomplishment that we are still
in the process of understanding. Many regions across the prefrontal
regions and throughout the cortex contribute to our abilities to focus,
organize our thoughts, regulate our emotions, and create the experience
of self. Head injury, ADHD, and other psychiatric illnesses provide
selective insight into the results of dysregulation or loss of neural
networks central to executive processing. As our knowledge of neural
networks expands, perhaps we gain a greater understanding of how the
mind emerges from the wetware of the brain. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 8

Consciousness and Reality People are accustomed to look at the heavens
and to wonder what happens there. It would be better if they would look
within themselves... ---Kotzker Rebbe At the heart of psychotherapy are
two interwoven processes; the first is the way in which our brains and
minds construct reality, while the second is our ability to modify these
constructions to support mental health and wellbeing. In other words,
why are we so vulnerable to constructing distorted realities, and how
can we learn to counterbalance these distortions? People come to therapy
because one or more aspects of their lives are not how they would like
them to be. Most often our clients know what they should be doing
differently but cannot bring themselves to make changes. They come in
with a feeling that something within them is holding them back. The
answers to their questions can usually be found in the architecture of
the hidden layers of neural processing---those networks within the brain
that construct our reality, guide our experience, and shape our
identity. Prior to my training as a clinical psychologist, I spent many
years studying the beliefs and practices of Eastern religions. One of
the first things I discovered was that Buddhism is less akin to Western
religious traditions than to the analytic introspection of William James
or the selfanalysis of Sigmund Freud. At the core of Buddhist teachings
is the belief that the experience of world and self are illusions (Maya)
and that our minds and senses fool us into attributing significance to
things that are, in themselves, devoid of meaning. In other words,
"reality" is a construction of the mind which we take to be an external
truth. So, at the heart of both

dynamic psychotherapy and Buddhism is the fundamental belief that our
conscious experience is a creative fiction subject to distortion.
Although controversial, the way in which the brain generates
consciousness, including its many distortions, may have been subject to
the pressures of natural selection. That is, our creative fictions may
be sculpted to enhance survival rather than to maximize perceptual
accuracy. While the way in which our brains construct consciousness and
reality may have some survival advantages, we turn our focus here to
those aspects which impair our relationships and limit self-insight. You
will soon see that the takehome message from psychoanalysis, Buddhism,
and neuroscience is to be a skeptical consumer of the offerings of your
mind. Beware of Maya We don't see things as they are; we see things as
we are. ---Anaïs Nin Let's begin by taking a look at some of the
illusions of consciousness through which we construct reality. The first
is that our conscious awareness comes together at some specific location
within our heads and is presented to us on a screen. This Cartesian
theater---an homage to Descartes's articulation of mind--body
dualism---creates the subjective illusion of self as a nonphysical
spirit inhabiting the body as opposed to being one with it (Dennett,
1991). This spirit, some religions believe, can leave the body upon
death, go to heaven, or occupy a new body in the next life. A second
illusion is that our experience occurs in the present moment and that
conscious thought and decision making precede feelings and actions. In
fact, our brains react to internal and external stimuli in as little as
50 milliseconds, yet it takes more than 500 milliseconds for conscious
awareness to occur. During this half-second, hidden layers of neural
processing shape and organize these stimuli, trigger related networks,
and select an appropriate presentation for conscious awareness
(Panksepp, 1998). Although we tend to think of our brains as processing
information from the environment, the vast majority of the input to the
cerebral cortex comes from what is already inside the brain. And because
our senses are

shaped by experience, they are also silent contributors to the
construction of reality (Gibson, 1966). The projection onto the screen
of our Cartesian theater is actually generated within the hidden layers
of our neural architecture prior to conscious awareness. This leads us
to assume that the world of our experience and the objective world are
one and the same. We also tend to believe that we have all the necessary
information we need to make choices. In truth, we often have little or
no access to the information or logic upon which we base our decisions.
In addition, we possess a powerful reflex to confabulate in the absence
of knowledge (Bechara, Damasio, Tranel, & Damasio, 1997; Lewicki, Hill,
& Czyzewska 1992). What we call intuition is likely the result of rapid
and unconscious processing that can be so surprising to us that it is
often attributed to occult knowledge or psychic powers. A third
illusion, which relies on the first two, is that our thoughts and
behaviors are under conscious control (Bargh & Chartrand, 1999; Langer,
1978). This hubris leads us to consistently overestimate the authority
we have over an outcome, while underestimating the role of chance,
unconscious influences, and outside forces (Taylor & Brown, 1988). So
although we may feel as if we are at the wheel of our lives, it might be
more accurate to say that most of us are trying to steer our lives with
the rearview mirror. The illusions of the Cartesian theatre, living in
the present moment, and being in total control of our actions can be
successfully exposed on cognitive and neurological grounds. Yet the
ubiquity of many perceptual and cognitive distortions in everyday human
interaction, provides convincing evidence for the existence of
nonconscious processing (Levy, 1997). And unlike bothersome
psychological symptoms, these illusions and distortions are invisibly
woven into the warp and woof of our perception, memory, and character
(Reich, 1945). By definition, hidden layers of neural processing cannot
be directly observed. Like black holes, we are made aware of their
existence by their effects upon the visible world. Hidden layers can
make the same situation a source of pleasure or dread, acceptance or
rejection, pride or shame. They will highlight some aspects of
experience while diminishing others, orient us to certain aspects of the
environment, and completely block awareness of others. Our hidden layers
translate past experience into an anticipated

future, converting past trauma into a self-fulfilling prophecy of future
suffering (Brothers, 1997; Freyd, 1987; Ingvar, 1985). This carryover of
past learning into the present where it may be irrelevant or destructive
is certainly one of the contemporary human brain's major design flaws.
Perceptual Biases and Self-Deception The most erroneous stories are
those we think we know best---and therefore never scrutinize or
question. ---Stephen Jay Gould The consistency of many perceptual and
cognitive biases across individuals reflects our shared neural
organization and functioning. Some of these biases are the result of
natural limits to our perspective and judgment, while others may have
evolved to help us cope with living in an uncertain and dangerous world.
Although many of our perceptual biases appear to serve us, they can also
lead to the kinds of problems that often become the focus of
psychotherapy. Social psychologists have identified a number of
consistent errors in human judgment that can be especially damaging to
relationships among individuals, groups, and nations. Our tendency to
explain the behavior of others based on aspects of their character,
while explaining our own behaviors as a result of external factors, is
referred to as the fundamental attribution error (Heider, 1958). In
other words, others flunk tests because they are not smart enough or are
too lazy to study; we fail because the test wasn't fair or because the
professor wasn't very good. An extension of this attributional bias
leads to a phenomenon called blaming the victim, where individuals
victimized by crime or poverty are believed to have done something to
create their misfortune (Ryan, 1971). While individual perspectives are
limited and incomplete, this does not stop us from assuming that we
possess the true view of the world. This egocentric bias leads us to
reflexively believe that anyone who sees the world differently from
ourselves is misguided or dull-witted. Unfortunately, it also leads
mortal enemies to both believe that God is on their side. While an
egocentric bias is reflexive and self-evident, maintaining a balanced
perspective requires sustained mindful effort.

Another bias organized within our hidden layers is called belief
perseverance---the tendency to attend to facts supportive of existing
beliefs while ignoring others (Lord, Ross, & Lepper, 1979). The hidden
layers are conservative, holding onto thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
that have been associated with past survival (Janoff-Bulman, 1992).
Thus, we scan for examples that prove preexisting beliefs and ignore
ones which contradict them. This tendency is likely driven by the
tenacity of fear memories stored within the amygdala and our desire to
avoid the possibility of danger in the unknown. This may explain why
prejudices continue to persist in the face of conflicting evidence. One
reason that our abilities of self-deception may have been selected
during evolution is because they aid in the deception of others. The
more we believe our own deceptions, the less likely we are to give away
our real thoughts and intentions via nonverbal signals. In fact, it
requires considerable more brain power to lie than to tell the truth,
and even more to convince others that we are being honest with them when
we are lying (Ganis et al., 2003). Good poker players raise the skill of
social deception to an art by keeping a poker face while learning the
"tells" of their opponents. Actions and beliefs that are the opposite of
our true desires can be quite effective in deceiving others. It has also
been noted that "people are remarkably reluctant to consider impure
motives in a loud moralist" (Nesse & Lloyd, 1992, p. 611) despite the
repeated and well-publicized downfall of one moral crusader after
another. In fact, the best con artists are often so convincing that
their victims refuse to accept that they have been cheated at all. The
distortions of the psychodynamic unconscious---reflected in defense
mechanisms such as reaction formation, denial, humor, and
intellectualization---are thought to keep thoughts and feelings out of
conscious awareness to help us regulate negative emotions. Defense
mechanisms may enhance survival by reducing shame, minimizing anxiety,
and decreasing awareness of depressing and demoralizing realities. Some
defenses also support social cooperation and lead us to either overlook
or put a positive spin on the bad behavior of family and friends. Freud
recognized that we can see the workings of defense mechanisms and other
aspects of the unconscious in the way that we organize and understand
ambiguous stimuli. In a condition of reduced external structure, our
hidden layers organize the world, make predictions, and highlight
certain thoughts

and feelings while ignoring others. You may remember that Freud referred
to this phenomenon as the projective hypothesis. Therapists employ the
projective hypothesis to explore the architecture of their clients'
unconscious. Some try to remain as neutral as possible to allow clients
to project feelings and thoughts onto them in a process referred to as
transference. In a similar manner, projective tests like the Rorschach
present ambiguous stimuli to evoke idiosyncratic perceptions of the
material. Finally, because of their uninhibited nature, Freud was
impressed with the value of dreams in providing us with insight into
hidden layers, calling them "the royal road to the unconscious." Most
forms of psychotherapy attempt to shine the light of conscious awareness
on belief perseverance and attribution biases, and undermine the
conservative nature of the hidden layers. Others engage in a deep
exploration of the dynamic unconscious, defenses, and primitive
emotional states. By encouraging clients to be open to new ideas,
explore the connections within their hidden layers, and take
responsibility for positive change, we challenge them to reorganize the
neural networks of their hidden layers. Searching for the Still Point
Men are disturbed not by things, but by the view which they take of
them. ---Epictetus By now it is clear that our brains are in the
business of constructing rather than conveying reality. This perspective
is in sharp contrast to the modern Western notion of the brain as a
combination camera, tape recorder, and computer. If our electronic
equipment really did function like our brains, we would replace them at
the first opportunity. But I'm sure you would agree that, imperfect as
they are, we would take our brains over a machine any day. Few of us
would want to sacrifice feelings of love, inspiration, and passion for
the sake of accuracy or efficiency. Once we wake up to how our brains
work, what do we do? How can we overcome or at least cope with our
distortions, impulses, and unconscious drives in constructive and
healthy ways? Fortunately, our brains contain structures and networks
that allow us to counteract some of the more

problematic workings of our hidden neural layers. Let's begin an
exploration of the evolution of consciousness with ice cream. I'm a
person who has been on a diet all my life with limited success. I could
do well all day---eat properly and exercise---but at night, I would seem
to have no self-control. I would go into each day feeling bad about the
night before and vow to do better, only to fail again. Years into
therapy I mentioned this in a session and was given the following
suggestion: "Pay attention to your thoughts, feelings, and fantasies
during the transition from doing well to your loss of control." It
turned out that, depending on the day, I felt exhausted, stressed,
lonely, or dissatisfied with one thing or another on these evenings.
When my therapist asked what I did with these negative and painful
feelings, I was stumped. I didn't remember doing anything with
them---they seemed to just dissolve. As I struggled to make sense of
this process, I recalled a vivid memory. I was a young boy of 5 or 6
standing in my grandmother's kitchen and had just expressed being upset
about something. I could feel my unhappiness expressed in the muscles of
my face and recall my grandmother's face mirroring mine. Without saying
a word she pivoted around, opened the freezer, took out a large box of
Neapolitan ice cream (chocolate, vanilla, and strawberry in three neat
rows), tore off the cardboard tab holding the lid closed, buried a spoon
in the ice cream, and handed me the entire box. Also without a word I
went to the sofa, lay down, put the quart of ice cream on my chest and
began eating. In fact there were no words at all. There was no memory of
discussing how I felt. Whatever bad feelings I may have been having
quickly dissolved in a haze of glucose. The similarity of this memory to
my experience in my adult life was striking. My hidden layers had
learned a pattern---feel tired, sad, stressed, or disappointed; get lots
of calories; watch TV; and the feelings pass. These early memories were
encoded in hidden layers and guided my behavior when triggered by
similar states of mind. Being the first grandchild in an extended family
that had experienced a great deal of sadness and loss, I realize in
retrospect that no one could cope with my sadness. I was the hope for a
better future where there would be no pain. Having no language with
which to process my feelings, I could only deal with them through
actions. As long as I continued to act this process out without
awareness of what was happening, it continued in a stereotyped manner
much like a posttraumatic flashback.

What is it that allows us to become self-aware, generate explanations,
and modify long-standing ways of being? How do we expand conscious
awareness in ways that allow us to change? Obviously, something has to
change in the way our brains process information when we benefit from
psychotherapy. Let's explore two central regions involved in awareness
and change---the prefrontal and parietal cortices. Because behavior is
easily observable, neurologists have traditionally focused on the
manifest results of brain injury such as deficits in language, motor
behavior, and memory. At the same time, there has been significant
confusion and misunderstanding when it comes to changes in subjective
experience. I have worked with many clients who perform within normative
ranges on objective tests of memory and intellect, but complain that
their inner worlds are no longer the same. Some use the metaphor of a
house and say that some rooms are no longer accessible to them. Others
have described blackboards they could use to work out problems that have
been lost. These subtle and elusive aspects of human experience have
received little attention from neurologists. What is even more difficult
for clients is to perform well on objective tests of memory and problem
solving, and be told that they have fully recovered, when in fact they
know better. Their use of three-dimensional metaphors like houses and
blackboards to describe inner experience may be telling. Is the house as
an archetype for the self (as Carl Jung suggested) more than myth? How
does the brain achieve conscious awareness? Where is the seat of
consciousness? The answer to both of these questions is that we don't
yet know. At this point, we must be satisfied with discovering pieces of
this complex puzzle of consciousness that will be assembled sometime in
the future. Because executive problems often arise after damage to the
prefrontal areas, it is generally assumed that consciousness and
selfawareness reside within these regions, but the key to understanding
consciousness extends beyond the frontal lobes. We can be somewhat
confident that consciousness emerges from the coordination of many
processes throughout the brain and that the prefrontal lobes are major
players. I would suggest that another major contributor to our conscious
experience is our parietal lobes. Let me explain why. The Parietal Lobes

The soul never thinks without a mental picture. ---Aristotle You may
remember that the parietal lobes evolved from the hippocampus which, in
lower mammals and humans, organizes an internal threedimensional map of
the external environment (Joseph, 1996; O'Keefe & Nadel, 1978). This is
especially useful in navigating a habitat for foraging, storing, and
retrieving food. The hippocampi of mother rats actually increase in size
when they have babies, in preparation for having more mouths to feed.
The hippocampi of cab drivers in London are larger than those of other
Londoners, because of their need for a detailed inner map of a large and
complicated city (Maguire, Woollett, & Spiers, 2006). It seems that the
parietal lobes developed a parallel capacity for constructing and
navigating a map of internal, imaginal space. Curiously, some studies of
primate brain evolution suggest that expansion of the parietal and not
the frontal lobes is most characteristic of the transition to the human
brain (von Bonin, 1963). Could the fact that we don't think of the
parietal lobes as a component of the executive brain reflect a cultural
bias of equating individuals with their external behavior rather than
the quality of their inner experiences? The parietal lobes'
interconnections with the rest of the cortex allowed for the integration
of working visual memory, attentional capacities, and bodily awareness
necessary for these imaginal abilities. This suggests that our
self-awareness was likely built in a stepwise manner during evolution
through a series of overlapping "maps"---first of the physical
environment, then of self in environment, and later of self as
environment. Thus, the growth of imaginal abilities allowed us to create
an increasingly sophisticated inner topography. The lower parts of the
parietal lobes develop through the first decade of life in parallel with
our increasing abilities in reading, calculations, working memory, and
three-dimensional manipulation (Joseph, 1996; Klingberg, Forssberg, &
Westerberg, 2002; Luna, 2004). Cells in these inferior parietal regions
respond to hand position, eye movement, words, motivational relevance,
body position, and many other components of the integration of physical
experience in space. Left parietal damage disrupts mathematical
abilities while damage to the right parietal lobe results in
disturbances of body image and the neglect of the left side of the body.
Despite these florid and debilitating symptoms, patients are either
oblivious to or deny the

significance of their deficits, which suggests that the parietal lobes
serve an executive role in the organization of self-awareness. Damage to
the parietal lobes disrupts the experience of location,
self-organization, and identity---in other words, who and where we are
(see Table 8.1). TABLE 8.1 Manifestations of Parietal Compromise Left
Parietal Compromise Results In Gerstmann syndrome, which includes the
following symptoms: Right-left confusion Digital agnosia (inability to
name the fingers on both hands) Agraphia (inability to write) Acalculia
(inability to calculate)1 The symptoms of Gerstmann syndrome are linked
through a unitary deficit in spatial orientation of body---sides,
fingers, and numbers2 Right Parietal Compromise Results in Deficits Of
Mental imagery and movement representations3 Visual-spatial awareness4
Visual-spatial problem solving5 Temporal awareness and temporal order6
Spatial perception7 Somatosensory experience8 Detecting apparent motion9
The analysis of sound movement10 Spatial-temporal abnormalities11
Contralateral neglect of the body and external space12 Denial of
hemiparalysis and neglect13

The posterior parietal regions weave together sensory information about
our physical environment with networks of organized motoric actions and
intentions which (along with the frontal lobes) create goal-directed
action plans (Anderson, Snyder, Bradley, & Xing, 1997; Colby & Goldberg,
1999; Medendorp, Goltz, Crawford, & Vilis, 2005). In combination with
episodic and working memory, this would provide a work space for
decision making about whether or not to perform an action---should I eat
the ice cream or is something else going on that I should pay attention
to? Utilizing these abilities, a frontal-parietal network could support
the integration of perception and action over time (Quintana & Fuster,
1999). Parietal activation occurs during a wide variety of cognitive
tasks, suggesting that high-level association areas involved in the
coordination of sensory and motor processing underlie what we experience
as abstract (nonphysical) processes (Culham & Kanwisher, 2001; Jonides
et al., 1998). It is likely that evolution has used these core
visual-spatial networks to serve as an infrastructure for language and
higher cognitive processes (Klingberg et al., 2002; Piazza et al., 2004;
Simon et al., 2002). The parietal lobes participate in our conscious
awareness of visual experience, voluntary actions, and a sense of agency
during actions (Chaminade & Decety, 2002; Decety et al., 2002; Rees,
Kreiman, Koch, 2002; Sirigu et al., 2003). The multimodal representation
of space in the posterior parietal areas integrates our goal-directed
behavior and attention with higher cognitive functions (Andersen et al.,
1997; Bonda et al., 1996; Corbetta & Shulman, 2002; Culham & Kanwisher,
2001). Like the frontal lobes, areas of the parietal lobes become
activated by novelty and appear to be involved in coding intentions and
calculating the probability of success (Platt & Glimcher, 1999; Snyder,
Batista, & Andersen, 1997; Walsh, Ashbridge, & Cowey, 1998). These
findings point to the fact that the parietal lobes are far more than
sensory-motor association areas, but are involved in the deployment of
attention, understanding the environment, and constructing the
experience of self (see Table 8.2). The medial parietal area can be
conceptualized as the central structure for self-representation,
self-monitoring, and a state of resting consciousness (Lou et al.,
2004). Damage at the junction of the parietal and temporal lobes
correlates with out-of-body experiences and a variety of other
disturbances of identity and self (Blanke & Arzy, 2005). There is also
evidence to

suggest that the parietal lobes participate in the creation of internal
representations of the actions of others within us (Shmuelof & Zohary,
2006). In other words, we internalize others by creating representations
of them in our imaginations. This allows us to both learn from others
and carry them with us when they are absent. These inner objects, as
described in psychoanalysis, likely serve as the infrastructure of the
construction and maintenance of our experience of self (Macrae et al.,
2004; Tanji & Hoshi, 2001). TABLE 8.2 Functions of the Parietal Lobes
Hemisphere Function Right Analysis of sound movement1

Left

General comparison of amounts2 Attention3 Self-face recognition4 Verbal
manipulation of numbers5 Mathematics6 Multiplication7 Motor attention8

Bilateral Findings Visual-spatial work space9 Visual-spatial problem
solving10 Visual motion11 Construction of a sensory-motor representation
of the internal world in relation to the body12 nternal representation
of the state of the body13 Verbal working memory14 Retrieval from
episodic memory15

Sequence and ordering of information in working memory16 Controlling
attention to salient event and maintaining attention across time17
Preparation for pointing to an object18 Grasping19 Movement of
three-dimensional objects20 A sense of "numerosity" defined as
nonsymbolic approximations of quantities (l)21 Processing of abstract
knowledge22 Perspective taking (r)23 Processing of social information
(r)24 Taking a third-person perspective (r)25 (l) left hemisphere (r)
right hemisphere

Some sort of frontal-parietal network appears to be essential to our
experience of self. Neural fibers connecting the middle portions of
these two areas appear to serve a general integrative function of
linking right and left hemispheres, limbic and cortical structures, as
well as anterior and posterior regions of the cortex (Lou et al., 2004).
Frontal-parietal networks work together to analyze the context and
location of specific variables, work to interrupt ongoing behavior, and
direct attention to new targets (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002; Peers et al.,
2005). Frontal-parietal circuits are also involved in the sustained
focus and updating of information in working memory (Edin et al., 2007;
Sauseng et al., 2005). They may together give rise to a global work
space or central representation allowing for conscious working memory
and self-reflection (Baars, 2002; Cornette, Dupont, Salmon, & Orban,
2001; Taylor, 2001). The frontal-parietal network may be primarily
responsible for the construction of the experience of self (Lou, Nowak,
& Kajer, 2005). A properly functioning frontal-parietal network allows
for the successful negotiation of our moment-to-moment survival and the
ability to turn our attention to inner experience. A compromised or
poorly developed

prefrontal cortex can ensnare us in "a noisy and temporally constrained
state, locking the patient into the immediate space and time with little
ability to escape" (Knight & Grabowecky, 1995, p. 1368). Without the
ability to reflect on and sometimes cancel reflexive motor and emotional
responses, there is little freedom (Schall, 2001). A similar phenomenon
can occur with anxiety, as in obsessive-compulsive disorder. When the
medial frontal lobes are incapable of adequate affect regulation,
victims become "stuck" to the environment or "stimulus bound" and unable
to override reflexive reactions (Brown et al., 1994). Constructing a
Self I never came to any of my discoveries through the process of
rational thinking. ---Albert Einstein Creating a quiet internal world
allows for private thought, self-reflection, and traveling through time
via episodic memory. Quiet moments can then serve as the grounds for
mentalization, creativity, and consolidating the self (Winnicott, 1958).
Victims of frontal brain injury lose this ability and are constantly
distracted by sensory and emotional experience, are unable to maintain
focus, and suffer deficits of imagination. These individuals become
trapped in time, unable to disengage from the constant stream of
sensations, emotions, and demands of their inner and outer worlds.
Although they retain consciousness, for them, attention, concentration,
affect regulation, and motivation become problematic, while higher level
metacognitive processes become impossible. Winnicott (1962) suggested
that the ego and one's sense of self consolidate during the periods of
quiescence when children feel safe and calm in the presence of their
parents. Good-enough parenting scaffolds the child, allowing him or her
to go "inside" and rest in imagination and the experience of self
(Stern, 1985). This may serve as an important mechanism of the
transmission of neural organization from parent to child. It is rare to
find a child who is able to be still and centered and feel safe in the
presence of chaotic adults. We believe that early caretaking builds and
shapes the cortex and its relationships with the limbic system, which
supports emotional regulation, imagination, and coping skills. To this
we now must

add the development of the parietal lobes in the construction of
internal space. As a child I had an imaginary retreat. I would close my
eyes and picture the back of my grandmother's closet, always piled high
with shoe boxes. Behind these boxes was a hidden door just large enough
for me (but not an adult) to squeeze through. Once through the door,
there was a flight of stairs leading up to a large room resembling a
medieval laboratory, the kind with a resident sorcerer. This was a safe
place for me---quiet and private---where I could imagine other worlds,
reflect on life, and fantasize about the future. The evolution and
expansion of the parietal lobes were likely essential to the emergence
of this kind of imaginal self. One study has shown that when experienced
meditators engage in meditation, the frontal lobes become less active
while the parietal lobes become more active, reflective perhaps of a
shift from outer to inner attention (Newberg et al., 2001). Other
studies have shown a shift to left hemisphere activation and stronger
immune response with meditation (Davidson, Kabat-Zinn, et al., 2003).
Interestingly, inferior regions of the right parietal lobe become
activated when we witness others being still. This may explain how
meditating on inanimate objects or statues of a tranquil Buddha may help
us feel centered within ourselves (Federspiel et al., 2005). This may
also be a part of internalizing calm parents as a model for
self-reflection. Johnson (1987) asserts that the experience of our
bodies provides the internal basis for meaning and reasoning with our
sense of numbers, quantity, and space growing out of bodily experience.
The brain's ability to take our physical experience and use it
metaphorically is the basis of imagination. For example, jumping down a
slide may serve as a sensorymotor metaphor for falling in love. The
child's experience of emerging from under the covers into the light of
day provides a metaphor for religious enlightenment later in life. The
balance provided by the vestibular system may be the model for
psychological and emotional stability, and ultimately for leading a more
balanced life (Frick, 1982). Physical metaphors provide a contextual
grounding in time and space that helps us grasp our experience and may
serve as an infrastructure of higher cognitive processes. Albert
Einstein, who did poorly in math during his formal education, went on to
solve some of the universe's most complex mysteries. He intuited
relationships between time, matter, and energy, which contributed

to the development of atomic energy and brought us a step closer to
understanding the workings of the universe. I remember my seventh grade
math teacher praising us with the phrase "Little Einstein." As you can
imagine, many neuroscientists were interested in having a look at
Einstein's brain to see if and how it differed from yours and mine. In
comparison to 91 other brains, Einstein's was different only in the size
of the inferior parietal lobe (Witelson, Kigar, & Harvey, 1999). A
subsequent examination of the same region revealed lower ratios of
neurons to glial cells when compared to other areas of Einstein's brain
as well as to the brains of other people (Diamond et al., 1966; Diamond,
Scheibel, Murphy, & Harvey, 1985). It is highly likely that this
enhanced neural-glial relationship enhanced neuronal activity and led to
superior visual-spatial abilities (Nedergaard et al., 2003; Oberheim et
al., 2006; Taber & Hurley, 2008). These neuroanatomical findings are
especially interesting in light of Einstein's reported use of mental
imagery to solve complex conceptual problems. Einstein described
translating numerical equations into images that he would manipulate in
imagination, come up with solutions, and translate back into equations.
This ability to conceptualize and manipulate three-dimensional objects
in imagination appears to separate us from other primates and may be a
uniquely human evolutionary accomplishment (Orban et al., 2006;
Vanduffel et al., 2002). Based on his description of his problem-solving
strategies and the findings concerning his brain, it is possible that
Einstein's unusual parietal lobes may have been central to his genius.
Einstein's difficulty in navigating the simple demands of day-to-day
life was notorious, making him the archetypical absent-minded professor.
Interestingly, one study has shown that the volumes of the frontal and
parietal lobes demonstrate significant negative correlation (Allen,
Damasio, & Grabowski, 2002). Being absent-minded may have been the price
he paid for an overdeveloped parietal lobe. Research suggests that inner
imaginal space enhances the possibility for creative problem solving,
empathy, and compassion. Perhaps this is one of the reasons that
Einstein turned his attention to world peace and other humanitarian
concerns later in life. The Executive Brain in Psychotherapy

All of our final decisions are made in a state of mind that is not going
to last. ---Marcel Proust As stated earlier, the brain is an organ of
adaptation, a process that continues for as long as we live. Given their
role as high-level association areas sculpted by ongoing experience, the
frontal and parietal lobes likely retain a great degree of neural
plasticity. This plasticity and their joint roles in the synthesis of
physical, social, and emotional information make these regions primary
targets of psychotherapy. In line with this, psychotherapy requires that
we step away from reflexive behavior and the immediate demands of the
environment to reflect upon our experiences in sophisticated ways.
Acting in instead of acting out provides us with the interpersonal and
intrapsychic space to try on new truths. Consider my client, Sandy, who
found herself trapped in a mysterious cycle of changing attitudes and
moods. Sandy came to therapy in her mid-40s with the usual concerns
about relationships, family, and career. Although her mood was generally
upbeat and positive, she occasionally came to sessions feeling
irritable, deflated, and hopeless, leading me to think that she might be
suffering from bipolar disorder. When I mentioned her fluctuating moods,
she was distressed that they were noticeable to others. She told me that
she had discounted their importance because they didn't seem to relate
to events in her life, "just hormones I guess." Once Sandy began to
focus her attention on these moods, she reaffirmed that they seemed to
come out of nowhere and disappear just as mysteriously. When she was
down, she felt like a fraud, and planned to quit her job and leave her
husband. "When I feel this way," she said, "I just lose the will to
live." On further reflection she realized that these mood states had
been part of her life for as long as she could remember---recalling
instances as far back as elementary school. We monitored and discussed
her experiences through a number of mood cycles and engaged in
considerable speculation about their origin. Her father was prone to
moodiness and she had a maternal aunt who had a "nervous breakdown"
decades earlier, which made us consider a genetic inheritance or
modeling behaviors that she saw as a child. Sandy struggled to find
thoughts, feelings, or events in her life that would precipitate them

and discovered that they did not coincide with anything related to her
work, family, menstrual cycle, exercise, or diet. All serious medical
conditions were ruled out, her only physical complaint being her
allergies and frequent sinus infections. On the outside chance there was
some relationship between her use of antihistamines and her mood
changes, we created a mood chart that included her use of medication.
Although we did not find any connection between mood and medication, it
did turn out that she consistently lost her will to live a day or two
before suffering a sinus infection. Her mood would then improve shortly
after the onset of her respiratory symptoms and headaches. Once we made
this connection, we waited for the next dip in mood to see if it would
again be followed by a sinus infection. Sure enough, the same pattern
emerged. Although we still did not know what affected her mood, the
timing did suggest that it was related to the cycle of her allergies and
sinus infections. Up to this point, our work together depended upon
Sandy's ability to reflect on her experiences, analyze her reactions to
situations, and think about her thinking. Now it was time to develop
Sandy's memory for the future, and create some experiments focused on
alternative plans and actions. We decided to anticipate her next dip in
mood with a new plan. We agreed that she would stop evaluating her life
on days that she lost her will to live. She was not allowed to think
about leaving her husband or her job, or assess her worth as a person.
Instead, the mood dip would be a cue for her to go to the health food
store, buy vitamin C and zinc tablets, and rearrange her schedule to
reduce stress. She also made an appointment with a new allergist. In
essence, her assignment was to remember the future in the present. Sandy
had to remain mindful of the possibility that what she experienced as
negative emotions was really a result of biological changes related to a
physical illness and not a collapse of character or impending global
catastrophe. We worked on developing a safe internal place for her to
retreat to at these times, where she could soothe and comfort herself
and focus on healing. Over time, the association between sinus
infections and mood changes held up---we had created a new narrative
with far more explanatory power than the one it replaced. For some
unknown reason, Sandy's biochemistry reacted to infection with a sharp
drop in mood, most likely related to drops in serotonin and dopamine.
The psychological depression experienced as a

result of these changes led her to reinterpret, in a negative way, the
value of all aspects of her existence. How she dealt with these feelings
was neither pleasant nor adaptive. By being mindful of this process and
using her frontal and parietal executive functions to associate
experiences with new meanings, she was able to engage in different
behaviors and create a better outcome. We had converted what usually led
to an existential crisis into a trigger for enhanced self-awareness,
self-care, and medical management. Sandy needed to learn how to pay
attention to her feelings, reflect on them with past experiences in
mind, and follow a new plan of action contrary to old reflexive
patterns. These important frontal functions allowed Sandy to escape from
automatic and detrimental behaviors. She was able to modify
stimulus-response connections by escaping the present moment both in
therapy and then in her day-to-day life, first imagining and then
executing a new scenario. As Sandy learned to understand the functioning
and fluctuations of her brain, she was able to utilize executive
functions and an imaginal self to gain insight, perspective, and change
dysfunctional patterns of behavior. Summary The exploration of human
consciousness is a vast new frontier for neuroscience where there may
always be more questions than answers. We know consciousness exists; we
just have no idea of how it emerges from the functioning of the brain.
An inherent challenge to this exploration will always be the conflict of
interest involved when something is studying itself with all the bias
and distortion that interferes with objective observation. There is no
easy way around this. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 9

From Neural Networks to Narratives: The Quest for Multilevel Integration
There is no greater agony than bearing an untold story inside you.
---Maya Angelou It appears that nature has retained a fundamental
strategy of connecting things---be they neurons, neural networks, or
individual people---into more complex organizations. As we zoom in to
look at groups of neurons and zoom out to look at groups of people, the
same basic principles of connectivity and homeostatic balance appear to
hold true. As we learn about the necessary synergistic connectivity of
neural networks, we are also coming to understand the relationship
between network imbalance and mental distress. From extreme PTSD to
everyday neurosis, we all exhibit a pattern of integration and
dissociation reflective of our adaptational history and the health of
our brains. At the level of the experience of self, networks dedicated
to sensation, perception, and emotion seamlessly integrate into the
emergence of conscious experience ( Damasio, 1994; Pessoa, 2008; Fox et
al., 2005). Let's take a look at the impact of a somewhat simple
breakdown of neural network integration on the experience of self. A few
years ago, a young man in his late teens came in for a therapy session.
The previous September, Craig had left home to attend his first year of
college, but by mid-December, something had gone haywire. His parents
were called by the dean and told that Craig had not been going to
classes for weeks. They were also informed by the resident advisor that
5 days earlier, Craig had locked himself in his room, thrown all of his
and his roommate's possessions out of the window, and was listening to
the same song 24 hours a day. His parents raced to campus to find him in
the middle of an acute psychotic episode.

Craig had been released from the hospital where I worked just a few
weeks earlier and it was good to see him once again independent and
active. As he walked across my office, I could see his movements were
slowed by the medications that were keeping his hallucinations at bay. I
had seen Craig in individual and group therapy for approximately a
month. His symptoms had slowly cleared and he was released to his
parents' care a week earlier. This was his first session since being
discharged. After he settled in, I asked him how things had been going
since he left the hospital. Slowly, and in a soft voice, he told me that
life was pretty good and that he enjoyed playing his guitar and working
on some new songs. He wasn't feeling paranoid or hearing voices like he
had been weeks ago, his sleep and appetite were okay, and he felt like
he was ready to return to school. "There's only one problem, Doc. I
don't feel comfortable at home because my parents and brother have been
replaced by doubles." "Doubles?" I asked him. "What do you mean,
doubles?" Craig started by saying that he had gotten a strange feeling
about his parents and brother when they came to visit him in the
hospital, but he figured he was off because of the medication. But once
he got home, he discovered the reason for his strange feelings. "After a
while I realized that they've been replaced by doubles!" I gave him my
best quizzical therapist expression and asked what made him think they
were doubles. Craig described how they were excellent copies and well
prepared to trick him. He asked them scores of questions he thought only
his parents and brother could answer and, sure enough, they got them
right. "Whoever is doing this to me is good!" he said with nervous
admiration. When I asked him again how he could be so sure they were
replacements, he replied with annoyance, "Don't you think I would know
my own parents?" This syndrome of suspecting impostors, called Capgras
syndrome, can occur alone but usually appears in tandem with some other
brain dysfunction such as schizophrenia, temporal lobe epilepsy, or head
injury (Serieux & Capgras, 1909). Although the neurobiology of Capgras
syndrome is not definitively understood, there has been ongoing
speculation that it is a disconnection syndrome that somehow separates
networks of perception, emotion, and conscious analysis (Alexander,
Stuss, & Benson, 1979; Merrin & Silberfarb, 1979). An EEG study found
"abundant and severe EEG abnormalities" in 21 Capgras patients in the
area of the

temporal lobes. This led the authors to suggest that the delusion of
impostors may be caused by a "dysrhythmia" of brainwaves in networks
responsible for matching faces with emotional familiarity (Christodoulou
& Malliara-Loulakaki, 1981). Capgras syndrome does not affect the neural
networks responsible for recognizing familiar faces. Craig could see
that these people he took for imposters were physically identical to his
parents and brother. But Craig's experience was that they no longer felt
like his parents---the emotional "glow" of recognition of loved and
familiar people was missing (Hirsten & Ramachandran, 1997). We can
hypothesize that a disconnection or lack of coherence occurrs between
the circuits of the temporal lobes responsible for face recognition and
the ompfc-amygdala axis, which would add the emotional reaction of
seeing a loved one. With this connection somehow disrupted, Craig's
still intact left hemisphere explanatory circuitry created a delusion of
imposters; an explanation that is logical if you accept the experiential
premise. The people in Craig's home looked and acted like his family,
but without the usual input from the emotional circuitry responsible for
the feeling of familiarity, his left hemisphere interpreter concluded
that they must be imposters. Most of us have felt the firing of these
familiarity circuits in an exaggerated form when we unexpectedly run
into a friend in an unusual place. Our shock of recognition leads to the
inevitable, "Oh my God, what are you doing here?" Craig was experiencing
what amounts to the opposite of this experience. He expected to have the
feeling of recognition but didn't. This is probably what he was
referring to when he said, "Don't you think I would know my own
parents?" Capgras syndrome may well be the opposite of a déjà vu
experience, where something which is actually new is paired with a
feeling of familiarity. Déjà vu is likely a random firing of familiarity
circuits in an unfamiliar setting. The fact that strong déjà vu
experiences are often reported by patients with temporal lobe epilepsy
suggests that their out-of-control electrical firing is activating the
amygdala, which is deep within the temporal lobes. The delusion of
impostors generated by the left hemisphere interpreter may be similar to
the attributions made about déjà vu experiences such as past lives,
clairvoyance, and other paranormal beliefs. This very normal impulse to
make sense of nonsense is also seen in schizophrenics, who attempt to
create a logical explanation for their bizarre sensory experiences

(Maher, 1974). In the face of experiencing thoughts being inserted in
their heads, patients ask themselves, "Who would have the technology to
do such a thing?" When I worked in Boston, patients pointed the finger
at MIT, while the people I treated in Los Angeles suspected Cal Tech.
Delusional beliefs can become quite central to a client's life as well
as tenacious and difficult to dislodge. For example, when three
patients, each of whom believed they were Christ, were housed together,
each came to believe that the other two were delusional (Rokeach, 1964).
Pathways of Integration All organs of an animal form a single
system...and no modification can appear in one part without bringing
about corresponding modifications in all the rest. ---George Cuvier The
long and circuitous path of brain evolution has not provided us with a
brain that is simple in function or straightforward in design. We have
already seen how the brain consists of different memory systems, two
hemispheres with different processing capabilities, and multiple
executive systems controlling different skills and abilities. We have
also explored how, when these systems get out of sync, psychotherapy
attempts to reconnect and balance them. Although we are just beginning
to understand functions and the complexities of our neural pathways,
some consistent findings are beginning to emerge. As we discussed in an
earlier chapter, the two main pathways to consider are top-down and
left-right. It is also important to always keep in mind that they are
not independent of one another because top and left areas have developed
certain special connections, as have the bottom (subcortical) and the
right hemisphere. Another important point to keep in mind is that these
top-down and left-right systems involve multiple structures along the
way, each with its own unique contribution and potential role in network
functioning. We should also add two more specific pathways, the
relationships between regions within the frontal lobes (the ompfc and
the dlpfc), and between the hippocampus and amygdala. These

systems also have particular associations with both top-down and
left-right integration. Let's review the general map of the brain's
pathways of integration. In Table 9.1, notice the alignment of these
four pathways. Top-down, left hemisphere, dlpfc, and the hippocampus are
aligned on the left because they tend to be connected more heavily with
one another than with those in the column on the right. They also tend
to be involved with conscious, rational, and language-based functions.
Bottom-up processing, the right hemisphere, the ompfc, and the amygdala
appear to have more dense connectivity among themselves and are more
likely to be involved with unconscious, somatic, and emotional
functions. So, for example, Capgras syndrome may reflect a disconnection
of bottom-up emotional processing involving the amygdala and right
hemisphere from the top-down and left hemisphere cognitive analysis of
sensory experience. TABLE 9.1 Pathways of Integration Top (cortical)
Left hemispher e dlpfc Hippocam pus

Bottom (subcortical) Right hemisphere

ompfc Amygdala

There is presently a great deal of research focused on breaking down
these functional networks into finer and more precise distinctions and
generating models of processing paths and organizational patterns.
Separating the roles of each region of the brain in each hemisphere is
also under exploration, as is the mapping of patterns of activation
(instantiations) for different symptoms and diagnostic groups (Dougherty
et al.,2004). As with all of this research, we have to keep in mind that
age, gender, and life experiences all play a role in how these networks
organize and function in each individual. For our present purposes, I
have chosen to

focus on these general categories because of their obvious applicability
to psychotherapy and mental health. Top-Down--Bottom-Up The complexity
of the nervous system is so great, its various association systems and
cell masses so numerous, complex and challenging, that understanding
will forever lie beyond our most committed efforts. ---Ramon y Cajal
Although there are many vertical circuits that cut across the horizontal
strata of the brain, important top-down networks for psychotherapists
are those connecting the ompfc and amygdala. The ompfc and the amygdala
are connected by dense bidirectional networks that feed physiological
and emotional information upward to the cortex while allowing the ompfc
to modulate the output of the amygdala to the autonomic nervous system
(Ghashghaei & Barbas, 2002; Ghashghaei et al., 2007; Hariri et al.,
2000, 2003). Think of the amygdala as a primitive structure designed to
link immediate threat with a rapid survival response. Think of the ompfc
as having the ability to gather and update information and use it to
predict potential outcomes and shape behavior (Dolan, 2007; Rosenkranz,
Moore, & Grace, 2003). Perhaps a good analogy is a squad of soldiers
trained to fight and survive (amygdala and anatomic nervous system) and
a general who is an expert strategist who continues to keep an eye on
the entire battlefield, update his strategy, and adjust long-range goals
(ompfc). In the normally functioning brain, the balance of
ompfc--amygdala activation reflects a dynamic moment-to-moment balance
of focused attention and emotional arousal (Simpson, Drevets, et al.,
2001; Simpson, Snyder, et al., 2001). When faced with a psychosocial
stress, we see elevated cortisol levels along with increased activation
in the amygdala and lower levels of activation in the ompfc (Kern et
al., 2008). Higher levels of ompfc activity are believed to reflect an
inhibition of affective processes and an enhanced focus on the outside
world, while a decrease suggests a shifting of attention to internal
processes. As negative affect decreases, so does amygdala activation,
while activation in the ompfc increases (Urry et al., 2006). It is now
believed that each of us has a unique homeostatic

balance of this circuitry which shapes our emotional regulation and
affective style (Davidson, 2002). Let's think about what happens in the
human brain during public speaking. For most individuals, getting up in
front of a group to speak results in increased cortical activation. This
makes sense because we need our cortex to process the cognitive demands
of giving a talk. But when socially phobic individuals get up to speak,
there is a decrease in cortical activity and an increase in amygdala
firing along with bodily symptoms of anxiety and panic (Tillfors et al.,
2001). This may help us understand the phenomenon of stage fright, where
people either forget their lines or find it impossible to speak when
faced with an audience. High levels of cortisol, dopamine, and bottom-up
inhibition from the amygdala can all take the prefrontal cortex
"off-line" during stress (Arnsten & Goldman-Rakic, 1998; Bishop, Duncan
& Lawrence, 2004). This "amygdala hijack," as it is called in the
self-help literature, is the takeover of executive functioning by the
amygdala and other subcortical systems (Goleman, 2006). The balance and
integration of the ompfc and amygdala are influenced by everything
including past trauma, current stress, and serotonin levels (Hariri,
Drabant, & Weinberger, 2006; Heinz et al., 2005). When people suffer
from symptoms of depression or anxiety, there is a general decrease in
cortical activation and an increase in anterior regions of the cingulate
and insula (Kennedy et al., 2007; Mayberg et al., 1999). This balance
reverses as mood lightens with or without treatment (Kennedy et al.,
2001). It has also been found that pretreatment metabolism in these and
other regions predicts response to antidepressant medication (Davidson,
Irwin, et al., 2003; Pizzagalli et al., 2001; Saxena et al., 2003;
Whalen et al., 2008; Wu et al., 1999). As we saw earlier, sadness and
depression also reflect a left-right imbalance. Left-biased prefrontal
activation downregulates negative affect in nondepressed individuals
while depressed individuals show bilateral frontal activation (Johnstone
et al., 2007). These findings highlight the fact that the modulation of
mood is likely to occur simultaneously on multiple planes of homeostatic
balance---top-down, left-right, and so on. Thus, a shift away from
depression may reflect a dual regulatory shift from right and down to
top and left activation. Keep in mind that conflicting results have also
been found, so our understanding of these processes is still just
developing (Holthoff et al., 2004).

Within this broad top-down system there are likely numerous subsystems
involved in emotional regulation. Different studies have demonstrated a
variety of activation patterns in broad top-down networks in tasks of
affect regulation and the voluntary suppression of emotions (Anderson &
Green, 2001; Beauregard, Lévesque, & Bourgouin, 2001; Phan et al.,
2005). For example, the coordination of activity between the amygdala
and the anterior cingulate has been shown to be correlated with trait
anxiety and a susceptibility to depression (Pezawas et al., 2005).
Suppressing cigarette craving correlates with increased activation in
the cingulate cortex and an inhibition of sensory and motor regions as
subjects respond to smoking-related stimulus cues (Brody et al., 2007).
The anterior cingulate, amygdala, and insula are modulated by the
processing of internal somatic experience during biofeedback training
while the anterior insula is involved with the interaction between the
accuracy and sensitivity of the feedback (Critchley et al., 2002). This
may be the same circuitry activated during therapy as we integrate
conscious awareness with somatic, emotional, and memory processing.
Simultaneous top-down and left-right inhibition is likely responsible
for what Freud called repression. As prefrontal and anterior cingulate
regions are inhibiting conscious recall of explicit memories, left
frontal networks can be simultaneously inhibiting negative somatic and
emotional memories stored in right-biased systems (Anderson & Green,
2001). The result would be a lack of conscious recall of a threatening
experience and a dissociation of experience from conscious awareness.
Left Hemisphere--Right Hemisphere The interpretive mechanism of the left
hemisphere is...constantly looking for order and reason, even when there
is none---which leads it continually to make mistakes. ---Michael
Gazzaniga As we saw in an earlier chapter, left-right integration is
required for proper language functioning, bodily awareness, emotional
regulation, and many other essential human processes. As we will soon
discuss, the emergence of storytelling and narrative structure as
universal aspects of human culture

may have emerged, in part, to assist in the integration and coordination
of the two very different brains. A greater left-hemisphere advantage in
verbal processing has been shown to be a predictor of a more favorable
outcome in cognitivebehavioral therapy (Bruder et al., 1997). This
suggests that those individuals with more left-lateralized language
abilities may also have stronger inhibitory capacities over emotional
experience stored in the right. It has been shown that good readers have
less interhemispheric connectivity and are better at processing rapidly
changing sensory input (Dougherty et al., 2007). For some tasks, less
integration and cooperation are an advantage, especially when speed or
focus of attention are factors. Having the input of both hemispheres may
be quite adaptive when we are solving complex social and emotional
problems, but is likely to slow us down and make us stumble if we need
to engage in fast and automatic behavior (Cozolino, 2008). A form of
treatment used to readjust right-left balance is transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS). TMS is a noninvasive, painless technique for the
stimulation and inhibition of neural firing. A coil of wires is placed
on the scalp that generates a magnetic field strong enough to penetrate
the skull. This magnetic field is transformed into current flow in the
brain that temporarily excites or inhibits select areas, which can be
applied either as a single pulse or repetitively (rTMS). Depending on
its frequency, it either increases or decreases cortical
excitability---fast rTMS increases activation while slow rTMS decreases
it (Daskalakis, Christensen, Fitzgerald, & Chen, 2002). In several
studies, patients with treatment-resistant depression experienced
symptomatic improvement after a series of fast rTMS treatments applied
to the left prefrontal cortex (Pascual-Leone et al., 1996; George et
al., 1997; Figiel et al., 1998; Teneback et al., 1999; Triggs et al.,
1999). These repeated magnetic pulses to the left hemisphere may have
increased activity and shifted the balance of mood in a more positive
direction. Slow rTMS applied to the right prefrontal cortex resulted in
similar improvements in depressive symptoms (Klein et al., 1999; Menkes
et al., 1999). Slower frequency rTMS to the right prefrontal cortex was
thought to inhibit right frontal functioning and have less adverse side
effects (Schutter, 2009).

Studies of rTMS and depression lead us to the conclusion that the
technique's ability to both stimulate the left hemisphere and inhibit
the right hemisphere may prove equally useful in depressed patients.
Current views take the position that restoring the balance between left
and right prefrontal cortex activity is more important in treating
depression than establishing clear increases in left-sided activity. If
rTMS can have a positive effect on depressive symptoms, might it work in
the reverse manner for mania? Studies in this area are less extensive,
but findings do suggest some effectiveness of rTMS in the treatment of
mania when it is applied at high frequency to the right prefrontal
cortex (Belmaker & Grisaru, 1999; Grisaru et al., 1998; Michael &
Erfurth, 2002; Saba et al., 2004). The procedure has been approved by
Health Canada for clinical use but not in the United States, where its
application is limited to clinical research. Dlpfc--Ompfc Modern
Psychology takes completely for granted that behavior and neural
function are perfectly correlated, that one is completely caused by the
other.... It is quite conceivable that some day this assumption will
have to be rejected. ---Donald Hebb As a whole, the prefrontal cortex
sculpts experience and behavior through a complex array of inhibitory
and excitatory activities (Knight, Staines, Swick, & Chao, 1999). You
will recall that the prefrontal cortex is divided into four regions and
that the dorsal and lateral regions tend to engage in coordinated
activity as do the orbital and medial areas. Because of these
connections they are often referred to as the dlpfc and ompfc. The
location of prefrontal activation varies depending on the emotional
salience of the task; the more emotional the task, the more ompfc
activation---the more cognitively demanding a task, the more the dlpfc
takes center stage (Goel & Dolan, 2003; Northoff et al., 2004; Schaefer
et al., 2002). As the cognitive demands of a task increase, there is a
decrease in activation not only in the ompfc, but also in the amygdala
and anterior cingulate, which are closely linked to the ompfc (Pochon et
al., 2002; Rushworth & Behrens, 2008). This is likely the reason why
engaging in cognitive tasks, like word or math problems, often reduces
anxiety.

The dlpfc exerts control over neural processing based on higher order
rules (environmental context, prediction, etc.) while the ompfc does the
same from the perspective of lower order rules (impulse, drives,
emotions, etc.). From this we get the sense that top-down and bottom-up
processing is interwoven with the balance of activation between the
dlpfc and ompfc, respectively. Interestingly, when people make decisions
congruent with implicit racial and gender biases, the ompfc and amygdala
become more active, while the dlpfc shows more activity when we express
beliefs that are incongruent with prejudice (Knutson, Mah, Manly, &
Grafman, 2007). This reflects what we already know---more primitive
impulses drive prejudice while education and expanded perspective allow
us to go beyond our reflexive limitations. Experiencing the world from a
first-person perspective and tasks of selfregulation activate ompfc
regions while situation-focused regulation activates dlpfc systems
(Ochsner et al., 2004). The ompfc becomes involved in diverse tasks that
require differing kinds and degrees of self-referential knowledge
(Ochsner et al., 2005). Within the ompfc, the decoding of the mental
states of others based on observable cues such as facial expressions may
rely on the right ompfc while reasoning about their mental states may be
lateralized to the left ompfc (Sabbagh, 2004). When we consider the
types of issues brought into psychotherapy, it is likely that we are
working to build, integrate, and balance the ompfc and dlpfc. Consider
what we do when we assist clients in shifting from their own perspective
to looking at a situation from another point of view, to thinking about
the situation once again from a more objective perspective. We are
calling upon the ompfc and dlpfc in different ways as we attempt to
guide them to a more holistic perspective of a life situation. This
process most likely enhances the growth of ompfc and dlpfc systems,
while building new brain networks to bridge the two for higher level
awareness. Optimal functioning necessitates coordination, flexibility,
and complementarity between these modes of functioning. When the ompfc
and dlpfc are in proper balance, they create the possibility of true
cognitive-emotional integration (Gray et al., 2002). In situations of
stress and trauma the ompfc and dlpfc are capable of either mutual
dissociation or inhibition (Roberts & Wallis, 2000). An inability of the
ompfc to modulate stress will result in a decrease of activation in the
dlpfc during a cognitive memory task and cause a performance deficit
(Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006; Drevets & Raichle,

1998). Building strong connections between ompfc-dlpfc circuits creates
resilience to stress and a hedge against resorting to dissociation, as
well as greater affect tolerance and ego strength. Hippocampus--Amygdala
Emotions have taught mankind to reason. ---Marquis De Vauvenargues The
hippocampus and amygdala both play central roles in learning and memory.
The amygdala (in connection with the ompfc) organizes emotional
experience and (in moderate states of arousal) signals the hippocampus
about what is important to learn. On the other hand, the hippocampus
(along with the dlpfc) participates in the cognitive evaluation of
situations that will inform the amygdala when to ramp up or back down on
its emotional reaction. In other words, I can see that the dog is
wagging his tail so perhaps I don't need to be as afraid of being
bitten. Since the activation of emotion and the cognitive analysis of
experience are both necessary for normal functioning, the proper
regulatory balance of the hippocampus and amygdala is vital. The
hippocampus is necessary for forming new explicit memories while the
amygdala organizes highly stressful and traumatic learning. At low
levels of arousal, amygdala activation supports hippocampal learning by
boosting the biochemical aspects of neural plasticity. At higher levels
of arousal, the amygdala stimulates HPA activation, which interrupts
hippocampal learning while supporting fear-based amygdala learning (Kim,
Koo, Lee, & Han, 2005; Kim, Lee, Han, & Packard, 2001). In essence,
during states of high arousal, hippocampal and amygdala networks become
dissociated, resulting in a disconnection between visceral-emotional
(amygdala) and declarative-conscious (hippocampal) processing (Williams
et al., 2001). Thus, optimal learning requires a balance of amygdala and
hippocampal participation. Many people, perhaps even the majority of
clients in psychotherapy, do not come for treatment of a major
psychiatric illness. Most clients who are somewhat "less ill" have so
far not been included in extensive (and expensive) outcome research that
includes brain imaging studies. Many people seek psychotherapy simply
because, as they often say themselves,

life has somehow gotten out of balance. This may mean that their fears
and worries have taken control of their lives and limited their ability
to function or find happiness in the world. Others find themselves
devoid of emotion and without empathy for others, leading them to seek
therapy to save their marriages and relationships with their children.
Many have the sense that they are not living up to their potential or
get in their own way when it comes to worldly success and emotional
satisfaction. These clients are often referred to as the "worried well,"
implying that they should somehow get over themselves and get on with
life. My sense is that this group of patients, in which I would include
myself, also suffer various versions of a homeostatic imbalance. An
exaggerated reliance on intellectual defenses, overemotionality, or a
negative attachment experience can become established as
self-perpetuating patterns that lead to social isolation and
underperformance. All of these suboptimal lifestyles are most likely
reflected in biased patterns of neural activation, which become the
focus of psychotherapy. While psychotherapy is a relatively recent and
culture-specific development in human history, talking to one another,
seeking out advice, and exchanging stories likely go back to the first
humans. Thus, the talking cure exists within a matrix of beings who
share the gift of gab. I suggest to you that the evolution of the brain
and the development of narratives have gone hand in hand. From Neural
Networks to Narratives \[Words\] leave finger marks behind on the brain,
which in the twinkling of an eye become the footprints of history.
---Franz Kafka The evolution of the human brain is inextricably
interwoven with the expansion of culture and the emergence of language.
Thus, it is no coincidence that human beings are storytellers. Through
countless generations, humans have gathered to listen to stories of the
hunt, the exploits of their ancestors, and morality tales of good and
evil. It has long been supposed that these stories support the
transmission of culture while promoting psychological and emotional
stability. Stories connect us to others, prop up our often fragile
identities, and keep our brains regulated.

Thus, I believe that both the urge to tell a tale and our vulnerability
to being captivated by one are deeply woven into the structures of our
brains. Narratives perform an array of important functions including:
Grounding our experience in a linear sequential framework Remembering
sequences of events and steps in problem solving Serving as blueprints
for emotion, behavior, and identity Keeping goals in mind and
establishing sequences of goal attainment Providing for affect
regulation when under stress Allowing a context for movement to
self-definition. For most of human history, oral communication and
verbal memory were the medium and repository of our accumulated
knowledge. The ongoing value of stories to each of us is highlighted in
today's world by the energy we invest in television, movies, magazines,
and everyday gossip. The drive of older folks to repeatedly tell the
same stories is matched by the desire of young children to hear them
again and again. This inter-locking conduit of culture across
generations carries memories, ideas, and ideals through time. The
importance of narratives in human evolution is further underscored by
the fact that our ability to remember and recall stories is essentially
limitless. In fact, the astonishing abilities of memory experts rely on
placing discrete pieces of information into narratives that expand the
capacity of working memory to the limits of their imagination. Although
stories may appear imprecise and unscientific (Oatley, 1992), they serve
as powerful tools for high-level neural network integration (Rossi,
1993). The combination of a linear storyline and visual imagery woven
together with verbal and nonverbal expressions of emotion activates and
utilizes dedicated circuitry of both left and right hemispheres,
cortical and subcortical networks, the various regions of the frontal
lobes, and the hippocampus and the amygdala. The cooperative and
interactive activation involved in stories may be precisely what is
required for sculpting and maintaining neural network integration while
allowing us to combine our sensations, feelings, and behaviors with
conscious awareness. Further, stories link individuals into families,
tribes, and nations and into a group

mind linking each individual brain. It is likely that our brains have
been able to become as complex as they are precisely because of the
power of narratives and the group to support neural integration. Much of
neural integration takes place in the association areas of the frontal,
temporal, and parietal lobes, which serve to coordinate, regulate, and
direct multiple neural circuits. They are our conscious switchboard
operators, able to use language and stories to link the functioning of
systems throughout the brain and body. An inclusive narrative structure
provides the executive brain with the best template and strategy for the
oversight and coordination of the functions of mind. A story well told,
containing conflicts and resolutions, gestures and expressions, and
thoughts flavored with emotion, connects people and integrates neural
networks. A Story Well Told Man's mind, once stretched by a new idea,
never regains its original dimensions. ---Oliver Wendell Holmes Have you
have ever watched the faces of small children as they listen to a gifted
storyteller? You can see the unfolding drama reflected in their eyes, on
their faces, and throughout their bodies. Listeners will experience a
range of drastically shifting emotions, be absorbed in every detail, and
even shout out warnings to characters in danger. Narratives allow us to
place ourselves within alternate points of view and increase our
understanding of the experience of ourselves and others. We can escape
our bodies in imagination to other possible selves, ways of being, and
worlds that have yet to be created. Through stories we have the
opportunity to ponder ourselves in an objective way across an infinite
number of contexts. In life and in therapy, we can use stories to
imagine our problems happening to someone else or view ourselves at a
distance (externalization). We can share versions of possible selves and
receive input from others. Finally, we can experiment with new emotions,
actions, and language to edit the scripts of our lives (Etchison &
Kleist, 2000). Our ability to edit narratives summons us to try on new
ways of being. (Recall the case of Sheldon and his magic tricycle.)

What makes for a good story? Why can I sit through Pretty Woman or A Few
Good Men over and over again, even though I know exactly how they end?
If you take a screenwriting class you learn that there is a formula for
successful narrative structure. Every story needs a hero, a protagonist
with whom we can identify. The protagonist is facing an external
challenge and possesses an inner wound that causes him persistent pain.
For both Richard Gere and Tom Cruise, this pain came from their
emotional estrangement from their fathers. At first the hero either
avoids the challenge or fails, leading him to question his ability to
succeed or even his desire to change. The challenge confronting the hero
is at first resisted, then rejected, and eventually accepted. During the
journey, the hero leaves behind old definitions of self and travels into
uncharted territory. Some inner transformation takes place that allows
him to face his demons, succeed in his worldly challenge, and solidify
his identity. Richard Gere accepts Julia Roberts and Tom Cruise faces
down Jack Nicholson. This is essentially the universal Myth of the Hero,
describing the transition from adolescence to adulthood (Campbell,
1949). Redemption---a word commonly used for this transition---can
happen at any age. The adolescent struggling to attain adult status, the
emotionally shut-down Scrooge faced with his history of loss, or a
client trying to make sense of early deprivation have, at their core, a
wound that needs healing. My explanation would be that what we share in
common---brain, culture, language, and the fight for growth and
survival---are the underlying motives of the heroic narrative. Another
way of saying this is that what we share in our common struggle for
survival and meaning is deeper and more powerful than those things which
make us appear different. Narratives and Emotional Regulation Good
psychiatry is a blend of science and story. ---Jeremy Holmes As the
language areas of the left hemisphere enter their sensitive period
during the middle of the second year of life, grammatical language in
the left integrates with the interpersonal and prosodic elements of
communication already well developed in the right. As the cortical
language centers mature, words are joined together to make sentences and

can be used to express increasingly complex ideas flavored with emotion.
As the frontal cortex continues to expand and connect with more neural
networks, memory improves and a sense of time slowly emerges and
autobiographical memory begins to connect the self with places and
events, within and across time. The emerging narratives begin to
organize the nascent sense of self and become the bedrock of our sense
of self in interpersonal and physical space. As our experience of self
and the stories we tell about ourselves become interwoven, self-identity
becomes the center of narrative gravity (Dennett, 1991). As children we
are told by others, and gradually begin to tell others, who we are, what
is important to us, and what we are capable of. These self-stories are
shaped by culture and co-constructed with parents and peers. And
although it does sometimes seem that children are little scientists
discovering the world, what we often miss is that they are primarily
engaged in discovering what the rest of us already know, especially
about them (Newman, 1982). This serves the continuity of culture from
one generation to the next as we reflexively strive to recreate
ourselves. The role of language and narratives in neural integration,
memory formation, and self-identity makes them a powerful tool in the
creation and maintenance of the self (Bruner, 1990). Stories are
powerful organizing forces that serve to perpetuate both healthy and
unhealthy forms of selfidentity. There is evidence that positive
self-narratives aid in emotional security while minimizing the need for
elaborate psychological defenses (Fonagy, Steele, Steele, Moran, &
Higgitt, 1991). In the same way, anxious and traumatized parents pass
along their negative experiences in the stories they tell. The
recognition of the negative power of personal narrations containing
negative self-statements stimulated the development of rational and
cognitive-based therapies (Ellis, 1962). Let's look at the role of a
positive narrative for a young boy. Seven-year-old Trevor was brought to
see me because his parents were concerned that he might have "something
troubling him." He was very close to his grandfather who had passed away
6 months earlier, but he didn't seem to have a reaction to this loss.
While his parents felt they had done everything they could to encourage
him to talk about his feelings, he didn't have that much to say. Trevor
seemed to be a normal kid with interests in science, video games, and
computers. As he became comfortable, we hung out, played, and talked
about all kinds of things.

During our second session, he mentioned that he liked doing puzzles, so
I purchased a few and brought them to the office. Before our session, I
spread one of the puzzles out on my desk. I put together a few pieces to
give him a jump start and had to quell my own compulsive impulse to keep
going. He was excited when he noticed it and asked if he could help me
work on it. "Certainly," I said, and we sat down to a session of
puzzling. It didn't take long for me to realize that he was having
difficulty and I wondered if I had chosen one that was too difficult for
him. The last thing I wanted to do was to give him a failure experience.
I offhandedly suggested that we didn't have to work on the puzzle if he
would prefer to do something else. "Maybe this one is too hard for us,"
I said. "No," he replied, "don't give up. We'll get it." Impressed by
his determination, we continued to move pieces around in search of
colors and patterns. Every once in a while, I would leave a piece in
front of him that I knew would fit with something he was holding. I
became more and more amazed at his patience and dedication. Many boys
his age would move on to something else or just clear the table with the
swipe of an arm. After a while, I heard Trevor mumbling under his
breath. He was repeating something over and over like a song or mantra.
I leaned over, slowly putting my ear closer and closer to him so I could
make out his words. Finally I could hear, "I think I can, I think I
can." He was chanting the theme of "The Little Engine That Could." He
was the little train that kept on keeping on. I immediately felt my eyes
well up and had to resist the urge to hug him. Sure enough, he slowly
got the hang of it and made lots of progress. I later found out from his
parents that the Little Engine was his favorite story and one his
grandfather loved to tell him. They told me he wanted to hear it exactly
the same way each time and if they made a mistake on any word he would
stop and correct them. It was clear that this Little Engine was a kind
of hero to him, and he used it when he was stressed by a challenging
situation to regulate his anxiety and keep himself moving ahead. Part of
this heroic story was likely the memory of a loving grandfather whom he
carried inside of him. The Little Engine became a way for us to share
about his grandfather. Trevor was showing me the power of a story to
soothe and inspire. I came to realize that his grandfather had done a
wonderful job of becoming part of Trevor's experience of himself and
preparing him for his death. I learned that Trevor's loss was

complicated because, in many ways, he still had his grandfather with
him. I believe that Trevor's ability to use narrative in this way and
his internalization of his grandfather's love bode well for his healing.
To serve their important role in emotional regulation, narratives need
to have a brief summary or hook that can be held in mind in the present
moment. This summary, which can be a word, a phrase, a visual image, or
even a gesture, can instantaneously evoke the beginning, middle, and end
of the narrative, and especially its message. In Trevor's case, it was
the phrase "I think I can." This decreased his anxiety, enhanced his
problem solving, and allowed him to discover his true competence.
Putting feelings into words (affect labeling) has long served a positive
function for many individuals suffering from stress or trauma. Labeling
emotions correlates with decreased amygdala response and an increase in
right prefrontal activation (Hariri et al., 2000). It has also been
found that amygdala--right frontal activation are inversely correlated
and that this homeostatic balance is mediated by the ompfc (Lieberman et
al., 2007). This suggests that the labeling process may require both the
lateral and medial prefrontal regions in order for cognitive processes
to have a modulatory impact on our emotional activation (Johnstone et
al., 2007). The narrative, which simultaneously activates an array of
networks, enhances metabolic activity and neural balance. The perception
of control has been shown to reduce emotional arousal and stress. It is
likely that cognitive processes involved in prediction and control
activate frontal functioning and downregulate amygdala activation. In
other words, thinking we have some control puts us in a state of mind
that prepares us to think and activates prefrontal functioning, which
reduces our emotionality. As a self-fulfilling prophecy, believing you
are an efficacious person stimulates frontal activation, making you a
more efficacious person (Maier et al., 2006). Even writing about your
experiences supports top-down modulation of emotion and bodily
responses. In a large series of studies, James Pennebaker (1997) and
others have instructed subjects to journal about emotional issues of
personal importance, especially experiences related to close personal
relationships. These studies have revealed increased wellbeing including
a reduction in physical symptoms, physician visits, and work absenteeism
(Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; Pennebaker, Kiecolt-Glaser, & Glaser, 1988).
This sort of journaling has also been found to correlate

with greater T-helper response, natural killer cell activity, and
hepatitis B antibody levels as well as lower heart rate and skin
conductance levels (Christensen et al., 1996; Petrie et al., 1995;
Petrie, Booth, & Pennebaker, 1998). Journaling about emotional issues
likely increases prefrontal activation, downregulating the negative
emotional activation of the amygdala (Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006). Our
ability to tame the amygdala (and the HPA axis) in this way results in a
cascade of positive physiological, behavioral, and emotional effects.
Levels of Language and Self-Awareness The less men think, the more they
talk. ---Baron de Montesquieu Language is not one entity used for a
single purpose. During the evolution of culture, types and uses of
language expanded along with the sophistication of the brain. Through
self-reflection, most of us become aware that we seem to shift back and
forth among different perspectives, emotional states, and ways of using
language. Introspection provides us with a window to shifts in states of
mind that reflect the activation and integration of different neural
networks. I am aware of at least three levels of language processing
that take place within my clients and myself during these shifting
states of mind; a reflexive social language, an internal dialogue, and a
language of self-reflection. Reflexive social language (RSL) is a stream
of words that services the maintenance of ongoing social relatedness and
communication. Primarily a function of left hemisphere processing, RSL
mirrors activity within the interpersonal world and is designed to
grease the social wheels. Verbal reflexes, clichés, and overlearned
reactions in social situations provide a loose but meaningful web of
connections. Most of us experience this whenever we automatically say
something positive to avoid conflict, or tell people we are fine
regardless of what's troubling us. The natural clichés of RSL are as
automatic to us as walking and breathing. This level of language serves
the same purpose as grooming in most types of primates. In addition to
RSL, we are also aware of the conversations we seem to carry on with
ourselves inside our heads. This internal dialogue often departs in
content and tone from what we express to others. And while RSL

is driven by social cooperation, internal dialogue is shaped by personal
emotions and is usually experienced as a conversation between two
aspects of the self. Internal dialogue may have evolved on a separate
track from social language to allow for private thought as well as
deceiving others. It may also be one of the primary ways in which right
hemisphere processing participates in conscious awareness. RSL and
internal dialogue are like overlearned motor skills that serve to
maintain preexisting attitudes, behaviors, and feelings. Like RSL,
internal dialogue is primarily reflexive and based on semantic routines
and habits reflecting our learning history. We hear in our heads the
supportive or critical voices our parents implanted early in life. So
while RSL keeps us in line with the group, internal dialogue keeps us in
line based on early programming. When we find ourselves reflecting on
RSL and internal dialogue, a new level of language seems to emerge, one
of self-reflection. In this state of mind, our thoughts and words focus
on the reflexive thoughts, feelings, and behaviors we usually engage in.
This third level of language is less a mechanism of social control than
a vehicle of thoughtful consideration and potential change. It employs
executive function and serves to develop a theory of our own mind. Much
of therapy consists of uncovering and exploring reflexive social
language and internal dialogue, both of which reflect unconscious
aspects of the self. In this process we develop the language of
self-reflection, learning that we are not only our social reflexes plus
the voices that haunt us but are also the one that can observe, listen,
and judge what we hear these voices say. As the language of
self-awareness is expanded and reinforced, we learn we are capable of
evaluating and choosing whether to follow the expectations of others and
the mandates of our childhoods. The language of self-reflection, when
contrasted with RSL and internal dialogue, most likely reflects a higher
level of integration. In this language, cognition is blended with affect
so that there can be feelings about thoughts and thoughts about
feelings. At a very deep level, this language leads us to meditation,
where we learn to quiet our thoughts and move beyond words. Therapy
attempts to create this metacognitive vantage point from which the
shifting states of mind that emerge during day-to-day life can be
thought about. This is accomplished by interweaving the narratives of
client and therapist and hopefully leading them in a more healthful
direction. You begin by making clients aware of one or more of the
narrative arcs of their

life story and then help them understand that change is possible and
offering alternative story lines. As the editing process proceeds, new
narrative arcs emerge, as do possibilities to experiment with new ways
of thinking, feeling, and acting. The importance of the unconscious
processes of both parent and therapist is highlighted by their active
participation in the coconstruction of the new narratives of their
children and patients. This underscores the importance of the proper
training and adequate personal therapy for therapists who will be
putting their imprint on the hearts, minds, and brains of their clients.
In essence, therapists hope to teach their clients that they are more
than their present story but can also be editors and authors of new
stories. When we evolved the capacity to examine our narratives
(metacognition) and see them as one option among many, we also gained
the ability to edit and modify our lives (White, 2001). The narrative
process allows us to separate story from self. It is like taking off
your shirt to patch a tear and then putting it back on. This allows us
to have the experience of a self that is separate from our behaviors,
feelings, actions, and problems. The fact that someone can say, "I'm not
myself today," implies the capacity for selfreflection and comparison
between a current state of mind and our everyday self-narrative. The
ability to take other perspectives also enhances our empathy for others.
Abbey Do not dwell in the past, do not dream of the future, concentrate
the mind on the present moment. ---Buddha Like most things, our
narratives are both good and bad. Unexamined, they keep us in negative
patterns. Seen and understood, they provide a means of change. Thus,
unraveling all of the conscious and unconscious material that supports a
narrative arc can take considerable time and bring many challenges. Here
is an example. Abbey, an extremely bright and charismatic woman, came to
my office with tears in her eyes and a smile on her face. Even before
she sat down, Abbey launched into a description of all the positive
events that had happened to her and her family over the last week.
Seeing the pain in her

eyes and the rigidity of her body, my face must have reflected the
sadness I was feeling. My expression seemed to make Abbey avoid my eyes
and speak even faster. From time to time, I would attempt to break in
and ask her what she was feeling. Abbey ignored my questions, talking at
an ever faster pace. She reminded me of how, as a child, I would cover
my ears and hum when my mother was about to say, "Bedtime!" I soon
realized that all I could do was sit, listen, and wait. I sat across
from her and tried to remain true to my feelings, allowing them to show
in my eyes and facial expressions. Eventually her speech slowed and she
became quiet and hung her head. Her feelings seemed to have finally
caught up with her, the impulsive stream of reflexive social language
finally coming to a halt. I was considering what to say when she spoke:
"I caught myself blabbing on." It was good to see that Abbey could
employ her language of self-reflection and share her observations with
me. I asked her what she had been thinking about while sitting in
silence. Abbey replied, "I was thinking of what an idiot I am and how I
must bore you with endless prattle about my stupid life." Now she was
sharing the content of her internal dialogue, likely programmed early in
life. She seemed deflated, depressed, and ashamed of herself. As a
reaction against her own shame, she attacked. "What a stupid job you
have, sitting in this office every day, listening to people's problems.
Why don't you get out of here and get a life?" Abbey soon lowered her
face into her hands and began to sob. I could see that not only was she
sharing with me the voices in her head and her fears and doubts, but she
was also projecting onto me her anger, confusion, and frustration. Her
internal dialogue was hurting her and she wanted me to know how she
felt. I said, "Being criticized can be really painful." She instantly
knew I was talking about the victimization by her inner voices now, and
by her parents as a child. When she spoke again, she told me of the
emptiness she felt from the loss of her husband a few months earlier
(until this point she had denied its having much impact on her). It had
become clear to her over the last few minutes that she had been coping
with her sadness by burying herself in a flurry of words, social
activities, and taking care of others. After a few minutes of silence
and deep sighs, Abbey began to talk about how much she missed his hugs,
good advice, and the feeling of safety of having him

around. Abbey was now speaking in the language of self-reflection. She
was able to mourn the death of her husband in this state of mind. When
clients shift to the language of self-reflection, the changes in their
tone, manner, and mood are palpable. I imagine at this moment that
clients have the clearest perspective on their thoughts, behaviors, and
feelings. They speak more slowly because the organization of sentences
takes time when they no longer rely on clichés and semantic habits.
Emotions bubble up and clients feel safe enough to express them in a
process that enhances affect regulation. This is when I feel most
confident about a client's ability to join me as a collaborator in the
therapeutic process. These states are usually fleeting and often not
supported by family, friends, or the day-today demands of modern life.
Therapy sometimes needs to become somewhat subversive and conspiratorial
as client and therapist attempt to work against all the forces of habit
and social momentum that keep us consistently unhealthy. It has been
said that the challenge of increased selfawareness is remembering we are
more than our reflexes and defenses (Ouspensky, 1954). Summary The focus
on integration exists at each level of nature's complexity from neurons
to narratives to nations. As systems become more complex, it takes more
sophisticated mechanisms and increasing amounts of energy to support
their continuing interconnection and homeostatic balance. In this
chapter we have explored the axes of neural integration as well as the
narratives that help us coordinate the government of systems that
comprise our brains and construct our conscious experience. Although
psychotherapy deals in stories, it turns out that they emerged from
brain evolution to serve the purposes of increasing complexity,
coordination, and connectivity between us. This is one of the many
connections between interpersonal relationships and brain functioning
that make psychotherapy a neuroscientific intervention. OceanofPDF.com

Part IV.

The Social Brain

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 10

The Social Brain Our brains and bodies are designed to function in
aggregates, not in isolation. ---John Cacioppo Using evolution as an
organizing principle, we begin with the assumption that our highly
social brains have been shaped by natural selection because banding
together in groups enhances survival. The more tightly interwoven we are
as a group, the more eyes, ears, hands, and brains we have available to
us. We know that the expansion of the cortex in primates corresponds to
increasingly large social groups and the development of language,
problemsolving, and abstract abilities. Our larger and more complex
brains not only allow for a greater variety of responses to challenging
situations and across diverse environments, but also process the vast
amount of social information needed to support communication and group
coordination. Increasingly sophisticated social groups allowed for task
specialization such as hunting, gathering, and prolonged and dedicated
caretaking. Caretaking specialization, in turn, allowed for longer
postnatal development and brains built not by genetic preprogramming but
by lived experience. So, while many animals need to be immediately
prepared upon birth to take on the challenges of survival, human infants
have the luxury of years of total dependency as they learn the
complexities of the group. With the expanding size of primate groups,
the grooming, grunts, and hand gestures adequate in small groups were
gradually shaped into spoken language. As social groups grew even
larger, more cortical geography was needed to process increasingly
complicated social information. This coevolution of relationships,
language, and brain allowed for the development of higher levels of
symbolic and abstract functioning. In other words, early caretaking

and intimate relationships are a fundamental building block in the
evolution of the human brain. Despite the fact that our brains are
social organs, Western science studies each individual as a single,
isolated organism rather than one embedded within the human community.
This way of thinking leads us in the West to search for technical and
abstract answers to human problems instead of looking at day-to-day
human interactions. Take, for example, how physicians responded to the
high mortality rate among children in orphanages during the last
century. Assuming that microorganisms were to blame, they separated
children from one another and ordered their handling to be kept to a
minimum to reduce the risk of contamination. Despite these mandates, the
children continued to die at alarming rates, leading staff to fill out
admissions forms and death certificates during intake for the sake of
efficiency. It was not until children were held and played with by
consistent caretakers and allowed to interact with one another that
their survival rate improved (Blum, 2002). The notion of the brain as a
social organ emerged in neuroscience during the 1970s as animal
researchers slowly began to appreciate that neuroanatomy,
neurochemistry, and social relationships are inextricably interwoven.
The notion that primates possess neural networks specifically dedicated
to social cognition was initially proposed by Kling and Stecklis (1976),
who found that damage to certain brain structures in primates resulted
in aberrations of social behavior and a decline in group status. Since
then, scientists have been exploring the varied neural terrain activated
during social interactions. Subsequent research in the expanding field
of neuroscience has uncovered multiple sensory, motor, cognitive, and
emotional processing streams that contribute to interpersonal
intelligence (Karmiloff-Smith et al., 1995). Many of these findings have
led to the growing realization that the lessons learned during a century
of dynamic psychotherapy may have important neuroscientific
implications. The most basic is that we are born into relationships and
come to our individual identity while resting upon social connectivity.
Another is that social interactions affect everything from our biology
to our intellectual abilities. Neuroscience researchers are slowly
coming to the realization that the scope of their scientific observation
needs to expand to include relationships.

Neuroscientists already possess the perfect model for understanding
interdependency---the individual neuron. We know that neither the
individual neuron nor the single human being exist in nature. Without
mutually stimulating interactions, people and neurons wither and die. In
neurons, this process is called apoptosis, while in humans, it is called
anaclitic depression. From birth until death, each of us needs others
who seek us out, show interest in discovering who we are, and help us to
feel cared for and safe. Relationships are our natural habitat, while
the isolated brain is an abstract concept. Thus, understanding the brain
requires knowledge of the person embedded within a community of others.
Therapists, teachers, and parents intuitively grasp this profound
reality just as laboratory scientists often do not. We are now in a
position to help research scientists know where to look as they explore
how the brain grows, learns, and changes throughout life. The Social
Synapse Life is the continuous adjustment of internal relations to
external relations. ---Herbert Spencer As we discussed earlier,
individual neurons are separated by small gaps called synapses. These
synapses are inhabited by a variety of chemical substances engaged in
complex interactions that result in neural transmission. This activity
stimulates neurons to survive and modify themselves and each other. Over
vast expanses of evolutionary time, synaptic transmission has grown
increasingly intricate to meet the needs of a more complex brain. A
parallel process has also been occurring in the evolution of the social
synapse. The social synapse is the space between us. It is also the
medium through which we are linked together into larger organisms such
as families, tribes, and societies. When we smile, wave, and say hello,
these behaviors are sent through the space between us via sights,
sounds, odors, and words. These electrical and mechanical messages
received by our senses are converted into electrochemical impulses
within our brains. These signals stimulate new behaviors, which, in
turn, transmit messages back across the social synapse. From the moment
we are born, our very survival

depends upon connecting to those around us through touch, smell, sights,
and sounds. If we are able to connect with nurturant others whose brains
are primed to accept us as an extension of themselves, then we can bond,
attach, and survive. The band of communication across the social synapse
is extremely broad and includes unconscious messages sent via posture,
facial expression, eye gaze, pupil dilation, and even blushing. As we
grow increasingly interdependent, our inner experience becomes more
visible through these and other means of communication, in order to
enhance the strength of our attachments (Cozolino, 2006). Contact with
others across the social synapse stimulates neural activation, which
influences the internal environment of our neurons. This activation in
turn triggers the growth of new neurons as well as the transcription of
protein, which builds neurons as they expand, connect, and organize into
functional networks. A basic assumption is that loving connections and
secure attachments build healthy and resilient brains, while neglectful
and insecure attachments can result in brains vulnerable to stress,
dysregulation, and illness. Early bonding experiences not only
strengthen the networks of the social brain, they also promote the
building of the brain as a whole by stimulating metabolic arousal.
Physical and emotional interactions between mother and child result in a
cascade of biochemical processes, enhancing the growth and connectivity
of neural networks throughout the brain (Schore, 1994). Face-to-face
interactions activate the child's sympathetic nervous system and
increase oxygen consumption and energy metabolism. Higher levels of
activation correlate with increased production and availability of
norepinephrine, endorphins, and dopamine, enhancing the child's pleasure
during positive connections (Schore, 1997a). The vital importance of
these early interactions to the building of the entire brain may help to
explain the death of institutionalized children deprived of interaction
and love (Spitz, 1946). You may remember from an earlier chapter that a
sensitive period is a window of time when exuberant growth and
connectivity occur in specific neural networks. The onset and conclusion
of these periods are genetically and environmentally triggered, and
correspond with the rapid development of skills and abilities organized
by each network. Thus, early experiences have a disproportionately
powerful role in sculpting the networks of attachment and affect
regulation due to the strength of learning during these

sensitive periods (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978). Just as
positive experiences equip us with feelings of self-assurance and
optimism, suboptimal bonding experiences become stored within implicit
memory, carried into adulthood, and become woven into our adult
relationships. Nowhere are these organizing principles more evident than
in psychotherapy. Attunement and Reciprocity Mirror neurons show how
strong and deeply rooted is the bond that ties us to others. ---G.
Rizzolatti and C. Sinigaglia Attunement and reciprocity are aspects of
the attachment process that reflect mutual awareness, turn taking, and
emotional resonance. Mother-- infant emotional attunement during the
first year is predictive of the toddler's self-control at 2 years, even
when temperament, IQ, and maternal style are controlled for (Feldman,
Greenbaum, & Yirimiya, 1999). A mother's ability to resonate with her
infant's internal states and translate her feelings into words will
eventually lead to the child's ability to associate feelings with words.
As the child grows, the pairing of feelings with words enhances the
integration of vertical and horizontal networks dedicated to language
and emotions. Early emotional regulation, established via mother--
infant synchrony, contributes to the organization and integration of
neural networks and the eventual development of self-regulation in the
child. Stage-appropriate attunement maximizes the possibility of neural
growth, network coherence, and secure attachment. The combined sense of
safety, freedom from anxiety, and excitement generated via attunement
provides the affective background for the experience of vitality and
spontaneous expression. For the newborn, attunement may be communicated
via stroking and cuddling; for a 4-year-old, it means helping him or her
learn to share with a sibling. A 16-year-old, on the other hand, may
need assistance with creating and staying focused on goals for the
future, while a 30-year-old will benefit from financial advice and some
free babysitting. This safe emotional background created by proper
attunement, reciprocity, and loving kindness parallels an optimal
educational and psychotherapeutic relationship.

The building of the social brain during the first 2 years is driven by
the attunement between the right hemispheres of the parent and the child
(Schore, 2000). It is through this connection across the social synapse
that the unconscious of the mother is transferred to the unconscious of
the child. The right-hemisphere-biased circuits of the social brain come
online at birth and appear to have their sensitive periods during the
first 2 years of life (Chiron et al., 1997). The mother seems to regress
to a state of preoccupation with her infant in the last months of
pregnancy, and continues in this state for a number of months after
giving birth (Winnicott, 1963). This maternal preoccupation involves an
increased sensitivity to the visceral and emotional experience of the
child in order to attune to his or her primitive means of communication.
The mother's purposeful regression allows her to lend her capacity to
translate bodily states into words and actions that are soothing to the
infant. Jump-starting Attachment A mother understands what a child does
not say. ---Jewish proverb Even before birth, mothers and children
engage in complex and reciprocal interactions. Communication occurs
through sound, movement, and touch, while their shared biochemical
environment informs the child about his or her mother's state of mind
and body. Prior to the formation of cortically organized social neural
networks, we possess a number of primitive reflexive behaviors that
jump-start and stimulate the development of the more sophisticated forms
of attachment behavior to come. These reflexes reach across the social
synapse and allow us to become quickly integrated with our parents. The
process of transmitting the communication style of the mother, family,
and culture begins immediately at birth. Within the first hours after
birth, newborns open their mouths and stick out their tongues in
imitation of adults, and after 36 hours they are able to discriminate
among happy, sad, and surprised facial expressions (Field, Woodson,
Greenberg, & Cohen, 1982). Seeing happy faces causes newborns to widen
their lips, while sad faces elicit pouting, and surprised expressions
result in wide-open mouth movement. Infants look primarily at the mouth
for happy and sad faces, whereas they alternate between the eyes

and mouth in response to expressions of surprise, suggesting they are
capable of selecting different visual targets based on the types of
information presented to them (Field et al., 1982). Over 20 involuntary
reflexes have been identified in the newborn. Some ---like the rooting
and sucking reflexes---help the infant obtain nurturance, while the
palmar grasp (automatic hand grasp) and the Moro reflex (reaching out of
the arms) help the child hold onto the caretaker. These early reflexes,
controlled by the brainstem, are gradually inhibited by the cortex and
replaced by conscious, flexible, voluntary behavior. Reflexes such as
these increase the newborn's chances of survival by enhancing his or her
physical and emotional connection to mother and father. The old image of
the infant as a passive recipient of stimulation has been replaced with
a view of the infant as a competent participant in the social
environment. One of my clients told me of his first interaction with his
son: "A few seconds after he was born, the nurse handed him to me and
told me to put him in a small bed under a heat lamp. I dutifully crossed
the delivery room and gently placed him under the lamp. The light was
very bright and he squinted hard, making his face look like a bunch of
wrinkles. I put my hand over his face to shield his eyes and he
instinctively reached up and took my thumb in his left hand and my pinky
in his right and pulled my hand onto his cheek. He was now about 90
seconds old and had become my son. I felt the glow of pride about how
clever he was, while simultaneously feeling a surge of protectiveness.
This was obviously a very intelligent child with a bright future." In
this way, reflexes provide the dual function of creating physical
connection and ensuring the emotional investment of the adults upon whom
the infant relies. Although specific words are meaningless, the tone and
prosody of the parents' voices hold center stage. Even strangers will
instinctively raise the pitch of their voice when talking with babies to
match their hearing abilities. A mother reflexively holds her baby
against her body after birth, maximizing skin contact and helping the
infant's hypothalamus establish a set point for temperature regulation.
The infant and mother gaze into each other's eyes, linking their hearts
and brains, while nursing establishes the lifelong relationship between
nutritional and emotional nurturance (food equals love).

The warm and happy feelings associated with holding, touching, and
nursing, the pain of separation and the joy of reunion, are all
stimulated through a variety of primitive neurochemicals that support
bonding and attachment. Through this biochemical cascade, mother--child
interactions stimulate the secretion of oxytocin, prolactin, endorphins,
and dopamine, resulting in warm, positive, and rewarding feelings. These
biochemical processes, in turn, stimulate neural activation and the
structural maturation of the brain while shaping attachment circuitry
(Fisher, 2004; Panksepp, 1998). The secretion of endogenous endorphins
results in feelings of wellbeing and elation. It actually does feel
better when a loved one kisses your boo-boo because endorphins are also
natural analgesics. These opiates are strongly reinforcing and serve to
shape our preferences from early in life (Kehoe & Blass, 1989). Research
with primates suggests that the activation of the opioid systems of
mother and child propels and regulates the attachment process. When
parent--child primate pairs engage in touching and grooming behavior,
endorphin levels increase in both (Keverne, Martens, & Tuite, 1989).
During separation, the administration of nonsedating morphine has the
same soothing effect on the infant as does the reappearance of the
mother. When naltrexone (a drug that blocks the effects of endogenous
opioids) was administered to infant primates, rodents, and dogs,
proximity seeking increased (Kalin et al., 1995; Knowles, Conner, &
Panksepp, 1989; Panksepp, Nelson, & Siviy, 1994). Reflexively orienting
the head to the sound of the mother's voice increases the possibility of
eye contact while the instinct to seek circles and complex figures
directs the baby's attention toward the mother's eyes and face.
Prolonged mutual gazing stimulates metabolic activity and neural growth,
while reflexive smiling evokes positive feelings and expressions in
caretakers, further stimulating the infant's brain. Close examination of
the bidirectional protoconversation between a mother and her baby
demonstrates that infants have far more influence on their mothers than
previously thought (Bateson, 1979). A baby does not simply react to its
mother, but instead learns how to affect her feelings and behaviors.
Both mother and infant adjust to each other's gestures, behaviors, and
sounds in a sort of lyrical song and dance (Trevarthen, 1993). It is
through this language of intersubjectivity that children learn from
their mothers about the fundamental safety or dangerousness of the

world. Protoconversation over the first year of life serves as the
interpersonal and emotional scaffolding into which semantic language and
narratives will gradually emerge. The growth spurt of the right
hemisphere provides the neural substrate for the development of the
emotional components of language. The Importance of Eyes There is a road
from the eye to heart that does not go through the intellect. ---G. K.
Chesterton The eyes are a primary point of orientation for infants. They
play a significant role in bonding and social communication. Throughout
the animal kingdom, eyes play a crucial role in determining the safety
or danger posed by others. Gaze aversion (visual cutoff) is an important
social behavior that indicates dominance hierarchy in both primates and
humans. Direct eye gaze is a threat signal in primates (De Waal, 1989),
and the recognition that we are being looked at results in increased
heart rate and amygdala activation (Nichols & Champness, 1971; Wada,
1961). What must it be like for primates trapped in zoos who have
hundreds of human primates filing by and staring at them each day?
Robert De Niro's "Are you lookin' at me?" monologue in Taxi Driver is a
dramatic example of the relationship between eye gaze, threat, and
dominance. Learning the language of eyes provides us with valuable
information about our environment and what might be on the minds of
others. We reflexively look up when we see other people doing so; in
these situations, the eyes serve as a source of social communication
about possible threats in our environment. Elaborate neural circuits
have evolved to monitor the direction of eye gaze of potentially
dangerous others in order to anticipate their next move. On the other
end of the spectrum, the connection among the eyes, the visual system,
and emotion can be easily witnessed in the delight a child takes in a
game of peek-a-boo. Thanks to the neurochemistry of bonding, the smiles
and laughter elicited from a child during peek-a-boo are just as
addicting for adults. There is a surge of good feelings in both children
and caretakers with each reappearance of the eyes. Similarly,

consider the way two people in love can stare endlessly into each
other's eyes, constantly recharging feelings of happiness. During
infancy, mutual gaze between caretaker and child is a primary mechanism
for promoting brain growth and organization. In their exploration of the
environment, toddlers regularly check back to see the expression on
their parent's face. If the parent looks calm, the child will feel
confident to explore further. A frightened look from the parent may
result in the child seeking proximity and decreasing exploration. This
use of the eyes and facial expressions to encourage or inhibit toddler
activities is referred to as social referencing (Gunnar & Stone, 1984).
In therapy, the way a patient experiences your gaze (as caring or
threatening) is an aspect of transference that may provide important
cues to early bonding experiences. An identical expression will, for
some patients, lead to a request that the therapist not stare at them,
while it will make others feel attended to and cared for. Although some
patients prefer to lie down and look away from the therapist, others
want to keep an eye on you. These reactions reflect the eyes' ability to
elicit emotions from the patient's interpersonal history stored within
networks of implicit memory. Thus, exploring the clients' reaction to
your gaze may yield valuable information. Recognizing Faces and Reading
Facial Expressions Laughter is the sun that drives winter from the human
face. ---Victor Hugo A vital function of the social brain is to
recognize faces and assign a value to them; in other words, are they
familiar or strange, friend or foe---should I stay or should I go? This
involves both determining identity (who is this?) and using facial
expressions to guess the other person's emotional state and intentions
(what are they up to?). The first part of this process involves the
complex task of recognizing a face from all possible angles, an analysis
that is easy for a child but continues to elude the fastest computers.
Although the recognition of faces involves both hemispheres, it is a
function most suited to the visual-spatial mechanisms and holistic
processing strategies of the right hemisphere. Research with primates
has demonstrated that a particular region of the temporal cortex
contains cells that are responsive to faces, their identity,

and various facial expressions (Perrett et al., 1984). Neurons activated
specifically by faces have also been detected in the amygdala connecting
the reading of others' faces to our own autonomic reactions, emotions,
and behaviors (Leonard, Rolls, Wilson, & Baylis, 1985; Perrett, Rolls, &
Caan, 1982). The temporal cortex contributes its abilities for complex
recognition tasks (i.e., the countless combinations of facial features),
while the amygdala and the ompfc add the emotional elements to
processing social information. Together they give us the ability to
approach friendly faces and make us wary of potential enemies. Our
temporal lobes contain neurons dedicated to faces that are essential to
our ability to relate to others. Besides being able to recognize faces
and the behaviors of others, we need to experience other people as being
different from inanimate objects. You are probably familiar with autism
and Asperger syndrome; both disorders are characterized by profound
deficits in the ability to relate to others. In interacting with
individuals suffering from these disorders, I have been left with the
feeling that, to them, I am no different from any other object in the
room. Not surprisingly, research has demonstrated that individuals with
autism process faces in an area of the right temporal lobe normally used
to process objects (Schultz et al., 2000). This finding reflects one of
the many neuroanatomical mechanisms underlying profound disorders of
relationship. Mirror Neurons Behavior is the mirror in which everyone
shows their image. ---Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Another way in which we
link up across the social synapse is with the help of what are called
mirror neurons. Let me first describe how they were discovered. Using
microsensors, neuroscientists are able to record the firing of single
neurons in monkeys' brains. This recording can take place while they are
aware, alert, and interacting with other monkeys. Through such methods,
neurons were discovered in the premotor areas of the frontal cortex that
fire when another primate or the experimenter is observed engaging in a
specific behavior, such as grasping an object with a hand (Jeannerod,
Arbib, Rizzolatti, & Sakata, 1995). Some of these neurons are so
specific that they only fire when an object is grasped in a certain way
by

particular fingers (Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998). What is even more
interesting is that these very neurons fire when the monkey itself
performs the same action (Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi, & Rizzolatti, 1996).
These neurons have been dubbed mirror neurons because they fire both in
response to an observation of a highly specific relationship between an
actor and some object and when the action is performed by the observer.
Thus, mirror neurons serve to connect our visual and motor systems with
frontal systems responsible for goal-directed behavior. For obvious
reasons, the same sort of studies are not possible in healthy human
subjects. However, noninvasive scanning technologies have been used to
extend these findings to human brains. One such study demonstrated that
areas in our brain analogous to those containing mirror neurons in
primates are activated during both the observation and the execution of
hand actions (Nishitani & Hari, 2000). Support for the relationship
between these areas in the monkey and Broca's area in humans comes from
positron emission tomography studies showing activation in Broca's area
during the active or imagined carrying out of hand movements (Bonda,
Petrides, Frey, & Evans, 1994; Decety, 1994; Grafton, Arbib, Fadiga, &
Rizzolatti, 1996). The fact that mirror neurons fire when the same
action is observed or performed leads to some interesting hypotheses
about their role in learning and communication. It has always been known
that both humans and primates can learn by observation. Because mirror
neurons activate for both observation and action, they may be the
mechanism for one-trial learning. Also, because these neurons have been
found in Broca's area in humans, mirror neurons may be involved in the
imitation, learning, and expression of language (Gallese et al., 1996).
Shared actions and turn taking may have been the genesis of
protoconversation and semantic language. Some language learning may be
jump-started by these mirror neurons within Broca's area, as the sounds
and lip movements of caretakers are imitated. The alternation of
mirroring and turn taking seen in mother--infant interactions may be a
contemporary reflection of the early evolution of language (Iacoboni,
2008; Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2008). The most interesting application
of mirror neurons to psychotherapy is that the facial expressions,
gestures, and posture of another will activate circuits in the observer
similar to those which underlie empathy. Seeing a sad child cry makes us
reflexively frown, tilt our heads, say "aawwhhhh," and feel sad too.
Watching an athlete walk off the field with his head held

high and chest pushed out can lead us to feel energized and proud. In
these and other ways, mirror neurons may bridge the gap between sender
and receiver, helping us understand one another and enhance the
possibility of empathic attunement (Wolf, Gales, Shane, & Shane, 2000).
The internal emotional associations linked to mirror circuitry are
activated via outwardly expressed gestures, posture, tone, and other
pragmatic aspects of communication. Thus, our internal emotional
state---generated via automatic mirroring processes---can become our
intuitive "theory" of the internal state of the other. These structures
are at the core of our ability to develop intimate relationships, be
attuned to one another, and aid our children in shaping a healthy and
balanced sense of self. Winnicott and the Emergence of the Person Many
patients need us to be able to give them a capacity to use us. ---Donald
Winnicott Donald Winnicott, an English pediatrician and psychoanalyst,
developed some basic principles that provide a helpful way of thinking
about the social processes which shape these neural structures. His work
with mothers and children led him to coin terms such as good-enough
mothering, holding environment, and transitional object, which have
become part of the basic lexicon of child development. His ideas have
been highly influential both because of their relevance to everyday
experience and their freedom from obscure jargon. Winnicott described
the core of mothering as providing a facilitating and holding
environment, which requires both the mother's empathic abilities and
respect for the autonomy of the child. A mother's devotion to her child
allows her to offer an expanding scaffolding that constantly adapts to
her child's changing needs and abilities. Winnicott defined the early
and intense focus on the baby as primary maternal preoccupation, and
understood it to include the mother's absorption into and attunement to
the experiences with her baby's primitive developmental state. In this
process, she utilizes the biochemistry of attachment and the circuits of
the social brain to bridge the social synapse between herself and her
child. The goodenough mother, in Winnicott's thinking, is a mother who
does an adequate

job in this difficult, complex, and constantly shifting process of
adaptation (Winnicott, 1962). Winnicott believed that to talk of an
infant separate from its mother was a theoretical abstraction. What
actually exists is a symbiotic infant--mother dyad within which the
child is nurtured and its social brain is formed, and from which the
infant eventually emerges as an individual psychological being. Because
an internalized mother and the representation of the mother-- infant
dyad remain as organizing principles of the social brain, they continue
to impact us throughout our lives. In this way, an adolescent or adult
with good-enough mothering is never really alone. A central component of
development from Winnicott's perspective depends on the mother's ability
to mirror her child. Mirroring is the process by which a mother attunes
to her child's inner world and gives form to his or her formless
fantasies, thoughts, and needs. Mirroring serves the purpose of taking
the disorganized processes within the child, naming them, and making
them a part of the relationship. The child then learns about his or her
inner world through the relationship. Although many decades before their
discovery, Winnicott was describing a process that relies on mirror
neurons to support this deep attunement between mother and child. It is
not uncommon for women in the third trimester of their pregnancy or in
the first months after giving birth to report that they feel they have
lost IQ points. Although these changes are often attributed to the
effects of hormones and sleep deprivation, they may also be related to a
shift in bias to the right hemisphere. A shift away from logical and
orderly lefthemisphere thinking to right-hemisphere-biased processing
may allow the mother an increased level of emotional and physiological
sensitivity that enhances the intuitive elements of attachment. A shift
of brain coherence toward the right hemisphere would explain the
decrease in linear semantic processing and memory abilities reported by
new mothers and mothers-tobe. Although such a shift might be very useful
for attunement with an infant, it could be detrimental to functions best
performed by the left, such as finding the right words, remembering
appointments, and following logical arguments. Many new mothers report
an increasing need during the first year to get out into the world of
adults or back to work. This need may parallel a shift back to previous
levels of left-right hemisphere balance. As the mother gradually
recovers from a deep preoccupation with her infant and again becomes
interested in other areas of life, the child is forced

to come to terms with some of his or her own limitations. In an
appropriately attuned parent, a graduated failure of adaptation will
parallel the infant's increasing abilities, frustration tolerance, and
affect regulation. Winnicott used the term impingement to describe the
impact on the child of maternal misattunements. These can take the form
of not appropriately anticipating the child's needs, interfering with
the need for quiet and calm, and even underestimating his or her
abilities. Parents have to fail to adapt in different ways in order for
their children to face the challenges necessary for adequate
development. Minor impingements are challenges that create moderate and
manageable levels of stress which the child is able to cope with and
master. These experiences likely promote and may even maximize brain
growth and neural network integration. Major impingements overwhelm the
child's ability to cope and integrate experience in a cohesive manner,
resulting in dissociated networking and functional disabilities. Gradual
minor impingements force the infant to grow, whereas major impingements
can result in derailment of positive adaptation and the solidification
of defense mechanisms. Minor impingements are learning-enhancing
experiences, whereas major impingements result in decreased neural
integration and hamper the child's development. One of Winnicott's most
clinically useful concepts has been the idea of the development of a
true and false self. Secure attachments and a sense of a safe world
create the context for the development of the true self, which
represents those aspects of the self that develop in the context of
manageable (minor) impingements, support, encouragement, and proper
meaning by the caretaker. Respect for the autonomy and separateness of
the child motivates the parent to discover the child's interests,
instead of imposing his or her own upon them. The true self reflects our
ability to tolerate negative feelings and integrate them into conscious
awareness and to seek out what feels right for us in our activities,
ourselves, and our relationships with others. Winnicott's true self is
obviously one in which neural network development has been maximized,
affect is well regulated, and emotions and cognition are well
integrated. The true self reflects an open and ongoing dialogue among
the heart, the mind, and the body. What Winnicott called a false self
results from major impingements for which the child is unprepared.
Prolonged impingements can result in chronic emotional dysregulation.
For example, neglect, abuse, or

continuous states of shame can overwhelm the child's natural development
and lead to the dominance of emotional defenses. These stressful
relationships will also inhibit neurogenesis and proper brain
development (Stranahan, Kahlil, & Gould, 2006). When self-involved or
pathological parents use children for their own emotional needs, the
child can become compulsively attuned to the parents, creating a false
self designed to regulate the parents' needs. Without appropriate
assistance in developing his or her self-reflective capacity, such
children live through reflexive social behavior and never learn that
they have feelings and needs of their own that should be expressed and
nurtured. Winnicott understood therapy most generally as a process of
controlled regression to a childhood state with the purpose of
succeeding in developing a true self in the present which was thwarted
in early life (St. Clair, 1986). Shame Every word, facial expression,
gesture, or action on the part of a parent gives the child some message
about self-worth. It is sad that so many parents don't realize what
messages they are sending. ---Virginia Satir During the first year of
life, healthy parent--child interactions are primarily positive,
affectionate, and playful. Due to their limited mobility, infants stay
in close proximity to caretakers, who provide for their many bodily and
emotional needs. As the infant transforms into a toddler, a parent's
role comes to include protecting the child from danger such as falling
down stairs, being bitten by stray dogs, or drinking fabric softener.
The emergence of normal, incessant exploratory behavior in toddlers is
driven by the brain's intense need for stimulation and growth. Due to
the toddler's increasing motor coordination and exploratory drive,
parents find themselves protectively saying "no" beginning at about
18--24 months (Rothbart, Taylor, & Tucker, 1989). Affection and
attunement, experienced as unconditional during the first year, come to
be tied to limit setting, control, and early attempts at discipline.
Shame, appearing early in the second year of life, is both a powerful
inhibitory emotion and a mechanism of social control. Thus the positive
face-to-face interactions that stimulated excitement and exhilaration
during

the first year come to include expressions of disapproval and anger.
Shame is represented physiologically by a rapid transition from a
positive to negative affective state and from sympathetic to
parasympathetic dominance. This shift is triggered by the expectation of
attunement to a positive state, only to receive negative emotions from
the caretaker (Schore, 1994). While it may be hard to believe, toddlers
expect their parents to be just as excited as they are about covering
the floor with milk or plopping their toys in the toilet. Parental
reactions of disapproval or anger are, at first, confusing and difficult
to comprehend but soon come to shape the biology and psychology of the
child. Behaviorally, people in a shame state look downward, hang their
head, and round their shoulders. This same state (submission) is shown
by your pet dog when he hunches over, pulls his tail between his legs,
and slinks away as you upbraid him for some canine faux pas. Similarly,
this posture in humans reflects social exclusion, loss, and
helplessness. During early socializing experiences, shame is the
emotional reflection of a lost attunement with the caretaker, drawing
its power from the child's primal need to stay connected for survival.
Prolonged and repeated shame states result in physiological
dysregulation and negatively impact affect regulation, attachment, and
the development of networks of the social brain (Schore, 1994). The
return from a state of shame to attunement results in a rebalancing of
autonomic functioning, supports affect regulation, and contributes to
the gradual development of self-regulation. Repeated and rapid return
from shame to attuned states also consolidates into an expectation of
positive outcomes during difficult social interactions. These repairs
are stored as visceral, sensory, motor, and emotional memories, making
the internalization of positive parenting a full-body experience. Thus,
the continual experience of attunement, misattunement, and reattunement
creates a kind of body memory which becomes an expectation of a positive
outcome for relationships and life. Children left in a shamed state for
long periods of time may develop permanently dysregulated autonomic
functioning along with depression, hopelessness, and despair. As the
child graduates into increasingly complex peer group relations, these
same physiological processes are connected to popularity, social status,
and dominance within groups at school and on the playground.

Because shame is a powerful, preverbal, and physiologically based
organizing principle, the overuse of shame in the process of parenting
can predispose children to developmental psychopathology related to
affect regulation and identity (Schore, 1994; Schore & Schore, 2008). As
part of his therapeutic programs, John Bradshaw (1990) refers to "inner
child work" as addressing the long-standing power of these early shame
experiences, which he calls "toxic shame." Shame needs to be
differentiated from the later-occurring phenomenon of guilt. Guilt is a
more complex, language-based, and less visceral reaction that exists in
a broader psychosocial context. Guilt is related to unacceptable
behaviors, whereas shame is an emotion about the self that is
internalized before the ability to distinguish between one's behavior
and one's self is possible. If guilt is "I did something bad," then
shame is "I am bad." We see this often, in individuals who spend their
lives taking care of others and doing good deeds in an attempt to make
up for some "sin" that they cannot recall. The Consolidation of the Self
Never be afraid to sit awhile and think. ---Lorraine Hansberry In
Winnicott's view, too many impingements prevent the infant from
experiencing what he called formless quiescence: those moments of safety
and calm that teach the child the world can be a safe place. It is in
these quiet moments that the experience of self is consolidated, neural
networks integrate, and fantasy and reality are gently combined. In
essence, goodenough parenting results in the belief in a benign world
where one is safe to build an internal experience of self (Winnicott,
1958). Thus, Winnicott felt that a major achievement of early attachment
was the capacity to be alone, an ability learned by being alone in the
presence of a competent caretaker. These experiences create enough
security to allow feelings in the child to spontaneously bubble up with
the confidence that they will be manageable and understandable. In this
state of mind, the need to employ defenses to cope with external threat
and inner emotions is at a minimum. At the same time, parietal-frontal
systems involved in imagination and the creation of an inner sense of
self become activated.

The manic defenses we often see in our clients result from the lack of
the capacity to be alone. Impulsive behaviors and thoughts, disconnected
from self-reflective processes, serve to inhibit emotions because to
these individuals, to feel is to feel bad (Miller, Alvarez, & Miller,
1990). Slowing down stimulates discomfort, sadness, isolation, and
shame, which become background affect throughout life. If manic defenses
are chronically employed, they can become a way of life and keep
children and adults from constructing inner imaginal experience and a
sense of self. Sadly, many children with manic defenses are mistakenly
diagnosed with ADHD. They are medicated to help them cope, while the
real problem goes unresolved. People with manic defenses often mask
their inability to be alone by stirring up a constant whirlwind of
activities, social interactions, and phone calls. Despite their outward
success, and their narcissistic and grandiose attitudes, they often have
great difficulties in relationships and report feelings of despair and
emptiness. Exploration of their histories usually points to patterns of
insecure attachments in which achievement served as the currency for
acceptance. Constantly escalating levels of activity are reinforced by
praise from others and the avoidance of the negative feelings that
bubble up when the patients are quiet or alone. These people often have
a hard time relaxing or taking a vacation because the lack of
distractions leaves them open to the intrusion of uncomfortable feelings
for which they have no effective coping skills. The inability to be
alone is seen most clearly in individuals with borderline personality
disorder, who have a catastrophic reaction to real or imagined
abandonment. For these people, separation is experienced as a threat to
their very survival in much the same way as an infant reacts to the
absence or loss of a parent. Their catastrophic reaction in adulthood is
likely the activation of an implicit memory of overwhelming abandonment
fears from a time before object constancy or self-regulation. It is as
if the child within these patients is in a holding pattern, awaiting
proper parenting. The extremely emotional life-and-death reactions in
borderline patients may be our best window to the chaotic and often
frightening emotional world of early childhood. Summary

The brain is a social organ connected to other brains via the social
synapse. Primitive reflexes jump-start the attachment process and are
gradually replaced by voluntary behaviors. The motivation to stay
connected is driven by biochemical systems we share with our primitive
ancestors. While there are multiple channels of communication between
us, vision is an important link across the social synapse and the
expressive face a focal point of social information. Theories of
psychological development by Winnicott, Freud and others provide us with
models for the development of mind embedded in these more basic
neurobiological processes. The development of a sense of self requires
periods of freedom from external threat and inner turmoil. It also
requires the development of frontal-parietal systems responsible for
inner imaginal space. Children constantly buffeted by external chaos can
remain trapped in a "selfless" state where they are witness to internal
impulses and external behaviors with little or no ability to either
understand or control what they are doing. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 11

Building the Social Brain: Shaping Attachment Schemas Experience is a
biochemical intervention. ---Jason Seidel While Winnicott observed and
worked with mother--infant pairs in his consulting office, John Bowlby
was performing naturalistic observations of primates in the wild and
children in orphanages. He was especially interested in mother--child
bonds, the importance of exploratory behavior, and the impact of
separation and loss on healthy development. His experiences led him to
develop the concepts of attachment figures, proximity seeking, and a
secure base (Bowlby, 1969). Bowlby's observations and the subsequent
scientific findings in attachment research are easily integrated with
Winnicott's theories of bonding and attachment. Bowlby's work, which
highlighted the importance of specific caretakers to a child's sense of
security, resulted in a major shift in the care of institutionalized
children. To encourage bonding, children who had previously been cared
for by whomever was available, were now assigned consistent caretakers.
In addition, this change in attitude changed the role of nurses and
caretakers from only custodians of small babies into emotional
attachment figures. In essence, they were told that becoming attached
should not be avoided. Subsequently, Mary Ainsworth and her student Mary
Main developed research methods to test Bowlby's theories. Decades of
attachment research followed, providing us with some fascinating tools
to study the sculpting of the social brain during childhood, as well as
the long-term impact of early experiences later in life. Bowlby
suggested that early interactions create attachment schemas that predict
subsequent reactions to others. Schemas are implicit memories that
organize within networks of the social brain, based on experiences of
safety

and danger with caretakers during early sensitive periods. A secure
attachment schema enhances the formation of a biochemical environment in
the brain conducive to regulation, growth, and optimal immunological
functioning. Insecure and disorganized attachment schemas have the
opposite effect, and correlate with higher frequencies of physical and
emotional illness. Bowlby believed attachment schemas to be a summation
of thousands of experiences with caretakers that become unconscious,
reflexive predictions of the behaviors of others. Attachment schemas
become activated in subsequent relationships and lead us to either seek
or avoid proximity. They also determine whether we can utilize intimate
relationships for physiological and emotional homeostasis. These
implicit memories are obligatory; that is, they are automatically
activated even before we become conscious of the people with whom we are
about to interact. They shape our first impressions, our reaction to
physical intimacy, and whether we feel relationships are worth having.
They trigger rapid and unconscious moment-to-moment approach-avoidance
decisions in interpersonal situations. Attachment schemas are especially
apparent under stress because of their central role in affect
regulation. Attachment is mediated by the regulation of the autonomic
nervous system by the social brain, and a cascade of biochemical
processes that create approach and avoidance reactions as well as
positive and negative emotions. Schemas shape our conscious experience
of others by activating rapid and automatic evaluations hundreds of
milliseconds before our perceptions of others reach consciousness.
Empirical research into attachment schemas began with Ainsworth's
naturalistic in-home observations of mothers interacting with their
children (Ainsworth et al., 1978). These mothers were found to fall into
three categories: available and effective (free autonomous), dismissing
and rejecting (dismissing), and anxious and inconsistent in their
attentiveness (enmeshed/ambivalent). The belief was that these different
caretaking styles would create differing coping and interpersonal styles
in their children. So the next step was to determine whether the
children of mothers in each category displayed differences in their
attachment behaviors, especially when stressed or frightened. The method
developed to study the children's attachment behavior is called the
infant strange situation (ISS). The ISS consists of placing an

infant and its mother in a room, then having a stranger join them. After
a period of time, the mother exits the room, leaving the child alone
with the stranger. Another brief period follows, and then the mother
returns. Children's reunion behavior, or how they respond to the return
of their mother, is rated to determine their attachment style. This
situation was chosen because of Bowlby's observation that being left
alone with an unknown other evokes distress calls in young primates. The
attachment schema of the child, or the expectation of being soothed by
the mother, should be aroused by the stress of the situation and
reflected in his or her reunion behavior. Does the child seek comfort
from the mother or ignore her? This research was begun with a number of
questions: Does the child have a hard time being comforted? Does the
child soon feel safe and return to play, or is he or she anxious,
clingy, or withdrawn? These and other behaviors are the focus of the ISS
scoring system and are thought to reflect the child's experience and
expectation of the mother's soothing capacity. Four categories of the
infants' reactions to their mothers' return have been derived from the
ISS: secure, avoidant, anxious-ambivalent, and disorganized.
Furthermore, a relationship was found between ISS categories and the
maternal behavior originally derived from in-home observations. The
general findings were as follows: children rated as securely attached
sought proximity with the mother upon her return, were quickly soothed,
and soon returned to exploratory or play behavior. These children,
comprising approximately 70% of the sample, seemed to expect that their
mothers would be attentive, helpful, and encouraging of their continued
autonomy. Securely attached children appeared to have internalized their
mothers as a source of comfort, using them to feel safe. These mothers
were seen as effective in their interactions with their children and had
become "a background context for seeking stimulation elsewhere" (Stern,
1995, Chapter 6). Avoidantly attached children tended to ignore their
mothers when they returned to the room. They would glance over to the
mother as she came in, or shun contact altogether. These children tended
to have dismissing and rejecting mothers and appeared to lack an
expectation that she would be a source of soothing and safety.
Avoidantly attached children behaved as though it was easier to regulate
their own emotions than seek comfort from their mothers, whose
misattunement or dismissal might well compound their stress.

Children rated as anxious-ambivalent sought proximity but were difficult
to soothe and slow to return to play. Anxious-ambivalent children, who
often had enmeshed or inconsistently available mothers, may have their
stress worsened by their mothers' distress. Their slow return to play
and emotional regulation may be a reflection of their mothers' anxiety
and lack of internalized safety. These children tended to cling more and
explore their environment less. Finally, there was a group of children
who engaged in chaotic and even self-injurious behaviors. On reunion
with their mothers, they demonstrated odd behavior such as turning in
circles or falling to the ground. They would freeze in place or be
overcome by trancelike expressions. During later research, these
children were included in a fourth category called disorganized
attachment. These chaotic behaviors were demonstrated in conjunction
with secure, avoidant, and anxious-ambivalent behaviors and were often
present in children whose mothers suffered from unresolved grief or
trauma. Parents of children in this category demonstrate frightened and
frightening behavior to their children, inducing an alarm state in the
child. In this biological paradox, the child's brain has an innate drive
to move toward the mother. However, since the parent is also a source of
alarm, the child is faced with an approach-avoidance conflict. The
resulting inner turmoil dysregulates the child to the point that his or
her adaptation and coping skills---even motor abilities---appear to
become disorganized. The fear and chaos of the mothers' internal worlds
can be observed in their children's behavior. The transmission of trauma
from parent to child is both powerful and insidious. A traumatized
mother who creates alarming experiences for her child leaves the child
no choice but to stay with and depend on the source of the alarm. The
child's safe haven is replaced with repetitive trauma by proxy and
emotional dysregulation (Olsson & Phelps, 2007). This process creates a
new generation of victims. In research with Holocaust survivors,
indications of parental trauma were found to be reflected in the
biochemistry of their nontraumatized children (Yehuda et al., 2000;
Yehuda & Siever, 1997). Further compounding the child's dysregulating
environment, the trauma-related behaviors of victims will lead them to
be avoided by other children in normal social interactions. It is not
surprising that children with avoidant and disorganized attachment
schema are also

shown to have higher levels of stress hormones and other biological
markers of trauma and sustained stress (Spangler & Grossman, 1993).
Parents Talk of Their Childhoods A Freudian slip is when you say one
thing but mean your mother. ---Unknown The relationships discovered
between attachment schemas and parenting style raised the question of
whether a parent's early attachment experiences influenced parenting
style decades later. While it was assumed that the parenting styles of
adults are somehow shaped by childhood experiences, there was no
empirical support for this transfer from one generation to the next.
Because implicit memory is inaccessible to our conscious mind, and
explicit memories of childhood are shaped by so many emotional factors,
a measure was needed that could bypass the usual distortions of memory
and all of our defense mechanisms. An extremely interesting research
tool that appears to have succeeded in this task is the Adult Attachment
Interview (AAI) (Main & Goldwyn, 1998). The AAI consists of a series of
open-ended questions about childhood relationships and early experiences
such as these: I'd like you to try to describe your relationship with
your parents as a young child...if you could start from as far back as
you can remember. Choose adjectives that reflect your relationship with
your mother, father, and so on. Which of your parents did you feel
closest to and why? Although the AAI gathers information about what
individuals remember of their childhood, it also provides the data for a
linguistic analysis of the coherence of the narrative's organization and
presentation. Coherence analysis is conducted based on what are called
Grice's maxims and include an examination of both the logic and
understandability of the narrative based on the following four
principles:

1. Quality: Be truthful, and have evidence for what you say. 2.
Quantity: Be succinct, and yet complete. 3. Relevance: Stick to the
topic at hand. 4. Manner: Be clear, orderly, and brief. Scoring takes
into account the integration of emotional and experiential materials,
gaps in memory and information, and the overall quality of the
presentation (Hesse, 1999). The AAI bypasses the left hemisphere
interpreter by examining the quality of the brain's synthesis of the
various cognitive and emotional components of explicit and implicit
memory. Siegel (1999) proposed that the coherence of the AAI narrative
parallels the level of neural integration attained during childhood,
providing a window to early attachment experiences and emotional
regulation. In essence, the AAI gets at how individuals put feelings
into words, resolve traumatic experiences, and integrate the various
networks of information processing across emotion, sensation, and
behavior in making sense of their lives. It does all of this while
simultaneously bypassing the problems inherent in self-report measures
about the past. Four categories emerge from the AAI that appear to
correspond to the findings of the in-home observations and the infant
strange situation. Mothers and fathers with securely attached children
tended to have more detailed memories, as well as a realistic and
balanced perspective of their parents and childhood. Adhering well to
Grice's maxims, they were able to describe these experiences in a
coherent narrative that was understandable and believable to the
listener (Main, 1993). This group, called autonomous, demonstrated an
integration of cognitive and emotional memories, had processed their
negative experiences, and was therefore more fully available to their
children. The second group of parents, associated with avoidantly
attached children, demonstrated a lack of recall for childhood events
and large gaps in memory for their childhood. This lack of recall is
believed to reflect a disruption of the integration of cognitive and
emotional elements of autobiographical memory. This could be due to
trauma, chronic stress, or a lack of assistance in learning to regulate
affect from their own parents early in life. They also demonstrated an
overall dismissing attitude toward the importance of their early
relationships, just as they were dismissive of their

own children now. The narratives of these parents were incoherent both
due to missing information and a tendency to either idealize or condemn
their parents. They gave the impression that they were defending against
fully acknowledging their histories through denial and repression. A
third group of parents, rated as enmeshed or preoccupied, tended to have
anxious-ambivalently attached children. Their narratives contained
excessive, poorly organized verbal output that lacked boundaries between
the past and present. They appeared preoccupied, pressured, and had
difficulty keeping the perspective of the listener in mind. Last, the
unresolved/disorganized group of parents had highly incoherent
narratives disrupted by emotional intrusions and missing or fragmented
information. Their narratives not only reflected the disorganization of
verbal and emotional expression, but also the devastating impact early
stress had on the development and integration of their neural networks.
The content of their narratives confirmed chaotic and frightening
childhood experiences which we can assume were devastating to the
integration and homeostatic balance of both body and brain. See Table
11.1 for a summary of attachment findings. TABLE 11.1 Summary of
Attachment Findings In-Home Observations Infant Strange of Mothers
Situation Interview Free autonomous Secure Emotionally available Infant
seeks proximity Perceptive and Easily soothed/returns effective to play
Dismissing Avoidant Distant and rejecting Infant does not seek proximity
Infant does not appear upset EnmeshedAnxious-ambivalent ambivalent
Infant seeks proximity Inconsistent Not easily soothed availability

Adult Attachment Autonomous Detailed memory Balanced perspective
Narrative coherency Dismissing Dismissing/denial Idealizing Lack of
recall Enmeshed-preoccupied Lots of output Intrusions, pressured,

Disorganized Disorienting Frightening or frightened

Not quick to return to play Disorganized Chaotic Self-injurious

preoccupied Idealizing or enraged Unresolved/disorganized Disoriented
Conflictual behavior Unresolved loss Traumatic history

The power of the relationship between parent and child attachment
patterns was demonstrated by Fonagy and his colleagues when they
administered AAIs to expectant first-time parents (Fonagy, Steele, &
Steele, 1991a). Over a year later, when the children reached their first
birthday, their attachment patterns were assessed using the ISS. In 75%
of these cases, the child's attachment pattern was predicted by the
coherence of the parent's narrative and attachment style many months
before birth. Parents of infants who came to be securely attached were
able to provide a fluid narrative with examples of interactions, had few
memory gaps, and presented little idealization of the past. These
parents did not seem to have significant defensive distortions, were
able to express negative feelings without being overwhelmed, and
listeners tended to believe what they were saying. It is not a big
stretch to see that these parents were best able to provide the kind of
good-enough social environment providing a balance between safety and
challenge, attunement and autonomy. We now have some evidence that
parents' capabilities for attachment to an infant begin to take shape in
their own childhoods. Their skill as parents will depend on their
empathic abilities, emotional maturity, and neural integration: in
essence, how they were parented as children. As a child, a young girl
may begin to imagine someday having children of her own. The shaping of
her virtual children will be influenced by both her fulfilled and
unfulfilled needs. The empathy and care each parent received as well as
the assistance they experienced in articulating and understanding their
inner worlds will influence future parenting abilities. A mother's
childhood can determine whether she is prepared to emotionally provide
for her newborn or if she will unknowingly require her child to give her
the attention she failed to receive when she was young (Miller, 1981).

Because attachment schemas are part of implicit memory, this level of
caretaking occurs automatically and connects our unconscious childhood
experiences across the generations. In this way, a parent's unconscious
is a child's first reality. Interestingly, negative events in childhood
are not necessarily predictive of an insecure or disorganized attachment
schema or future parenting style. Working through, processing, and
integrating early experiences, and constructing coherent narratives, are
more accurate predictors of a parent's ability to be a safe haven for
his or her children. This earned autonomy, through the healing of
childhood wounds, appears to interrupt the transmission of negative
attachment patterns from one generation to the next. The inference that
parents who are rated as autonomous have higher levels of neural
integration is based on the fact that they are able to access and
connect cognitive and emotional functioning in a constructive and useful
manner. They do not appear to be suffering the effects of unresolved
trauma or dissociative defenses and have attained a high degree of
affect regulation, as demonstrated by their ability to meet the demands
of parenting with ongoing grace. They are able to remember and make
sense of their own childhoods and are available to their children both
verbally and emotionally. Their children develop attachment schemas that
make them secure in the expectation that their parents are a safe haven
and will soothe and assist them when threats arise. Not surprisingly,
parents' emotional insight and availability to themselves appears to
parallel their emotional availability to their children. The three
nonsecure patterns of attachment research all reflect lower levels of
psychological and neurological integration. They also correlate with the
use of more primitive psychological defenses associated with
disconnections among streams of processing within the brain. The lack of
recall and black-and-white thinking of the dismissing parent likely
reflect blocked and unintegrated neural coherence. This brain
organization then results in decreased attention and emotional
availability to the child. The enmeshed parent has difficulty with
boundaries between self and others, as well as between past memories and
present experiences. These internal and interpersonal issues then lead
to inconsistent availability and a flood of words that dysregulate the
child. Thus the child, who is also anxious and ambivalent, will seek
proximity but have a difficult time returning to play because of the
unpredictable availability, as well as the confusing and

emotionally dysregulating nature of the parent's messages and emotions.
The internalized mother, instead of being a source of security and
autonomic regulation, becomes organized as a destabilizing state of mind
and body. Maternal and paternal instincts---in fact all caretaking
behaviors---are acts of nurturance that depend upon the successful
inhibition of competitive and aggressive impulses. Too often, however,
that inhibition is incomplete and some of us are unable to be
good-enough parents. When a parent abuses, neglects, or abandons a
child, the parent is communicating to the child that he is less fit.
Consequently, the child's brain may become shaped in ways that do not
support his long-term survival. Nonloving behavior signals to the child
that the world is a dangerous place and tells him to not explore,
discover, or take chances. When children are traumatized, abused, or
neglected, they are taught that they are not among the chosen. They grow
to have thoughts, states of mind, emotions, and immunological
functioning that are inconsistent with well-being, successful
procreation, and long-term survival. With all due respect to the old
adage, we could also say that what doesn't kill us makes us weaker. The
tragedy of this lies in the fact that early experiences have such a
disproportionately powerful impact on the development of the
infrastructure of the brain. As highly adaptive social organs, our
brains are just as capable of adjusting to unhealthy environments and
pathological caretakers as they are to good-enough parents. While our
brains become shaped to survive early traumatic environments, many of
these adaptations may impede health and well-being later in life.
Negative interpersonal experiences early in life are a primary source of
the symptoms for which people seek relief in psychotherapy. Secure
attachments represent the optimal balance of sympathetic and
parasympathetic arousal, whereas their imbalance correlates with
insecure attachment patterns such as fight or flight and splitting
(Schore, 1994). The balance of these two systems becomes established
early in life and translates into enduring patterns of arousal,
reactivity to stress, and possible vulnerability to adolescent and adult
psychopathology. Poor attachment patterns lead to long-lasting emotional
and physical over-or underarousal throughout the body and the brain.
Secure and insecure attachment schemas are quite different. Securely
attached children do not produce an adrenocortical response to stress,

suggesting that secure attachment serves as a successful coping
strategy. On the other hand, those with insecure attachment schemas do
show a stress reaction, demonstrating that insecure attachment is better
described by a model of arousal rather than of successful coping (Izard
et al., 1991; Nachmias, Gunnar, Mangelsdorf, Parritz, & Buss, 1996;
Spangler & Grossman, 1993; Spangler & Schieche, 1998). In other words,
the behavior of insecurely attached individuals is an expression of the
state of their autonomic arousal in response to fear. Narrative
Co-construction The wise man must remember that while he is a descendant
of the past, he is a parent of the future. ---Herbert Spencer
Parent--child talk, in the context of emotional attunement, provides the
ground for the co-construction of narratives. These narratives, in time,
become the mass of our inner experience and the parameters of our
personal and social identities. When verbal interactions include
references to sensations, feelings, behaviors, and knowledge, they
provide a medium through which the child's brain is able to integrate
the various aspects of its experience in a coherent manner. The
organization of autobiographical memory that includes input from
multiple neural networks enhances selfawareness and increases the
ability to solve problems, cope with stress, and regulate affect. This
integrative process is what psychotherapy attempts to establish when it
is absent. Co-constructed narratives form the core of human groups, from
primitive tribes to modern families. The combined participation of
caretakers and children in narrating shared experiences organizes
memories, embeds them within a social context, and assists in linking
feelings, actions, and others to the self. The creation and repetition
of stories help children to develop and practice recall abilities and
have their memories shaped in relationships (Nelson, 1993). This mutual
shaping of memory between child and caretaker can serve both positive
and negative ends. Positive outcomes include teaching the importance of
accuracy of memory, imparting of cultural values, and shaping the
child's view of herself based on her role in the story. Negative
outcomes include the transfer of the caretakers' fears

and anxieties into the child's narratives so that they become central
themes in the experience of the child (Ochs & Capps, 2001). When
caretakers are unable to tolerate certain emotions, they will be
excluded from their narratives or shaped into distorted but more
acceptable forms. The narratives of their children will come to reflect
these editorial choices. At the extreme, parents can be so overwhelmed
by the emotions related to unresolved trauma that their narratives
become disjointed and incoherent. On the other hand, narratives that
struggle to integrate frightening experiences with words can serve as
the context for healing by simultaneously creating cortical activation
and increasing descending control over subcortically triggered emotions.
Parental narratives, both coherent and incoherent, become the blueprint
not only for the child's narratives, but for the organization and
integration of their neural circuitry. As it turns out, there appears to
be a relationship among the complexity of a child's narratives,
self-talk, and the security of the child's attachment. Main and her
colleagues (Main, Kaplan, & Cassidy, 1985) studied a group of 6-year-old
children who, at 1 year, were assessed in the infant strange situation.
They discovered that securely attached children engaged in self-talk
during toddlerhood and spontaneous self-reflective remarks at age 6.
They also tended to make comments about their thinking process and their
ability to remember things about their history. These processes of mind,
which insecurely attached children often lack, reflect the utilization
of narratives in the development of self and self-identity. They also
point to a more sophisticated ability to metacognize (think about
thinking), that represents a high level of neurolinguistic
self-regulation. What we are witnessing appears to be the
internalization of their parents' self-regulatory mechanisms. As you
might expect, child abuse correlates with less secure attachment
patterns in children and a decreased ability to talk (or think) about
their internal states (Beeghly & Cicchetti, 1994). Fonagy, Steele,
Steele, Moran, et al. (1991) studied the relationship between infant
security and reflective self-functioning in mothers and fathers. They
found a strong correlation between measures of self-reflection and
narrative coherence. In fact, when reflective self-function was
controlled for in the statistical analysis, coherence no longer related
to infant security. This suggests that the relationship between
coherence and reflective self-functioning is powerful, and that the
ability to reflect on the self plays an important role in the
integration of multiple processing

networks of memory, affect regulation, and organization. In discussing
these results, the researchers suggested, "The caregiver who manifests
this capacity at its maximum will be the most likely to be able to
respect the child's vulnerable emerging psychological world and reduce
to a minimum the occasions on which the child needs to make recourse to
primitive defensive behavior characteristic of insecure attachment"
(Chapter 11). When the parents' inability to verbalize internal and
external experiences leaves the child in silence, the child does not
develop a capacity to understand and manage his or her own inner and
outer world. The ability of language to integrate neural structures and
organize experience at a conscious level is left unutilized. When
children with nonhealing parents experience trauma early in life, the
stress of each new developmental challenge is multiplied. In the same
way, language, in combination with emotional attunement, is a central
tool in the therapeutic process, creating the opportunity for neural
growth and neural network integration. A child who is able to achieve
this ability with the help of someone other than the primary caretaker,
may be able to earn a higher level of integration and security than
would be predicted by his or her parents' rating on the Adult Attachment
Interview. This may come from other significant people in the child's
environment who are able to attune to the child's world and assist in
the child's articulation of his or her emotional life. This might
explain some of the earned autonomy seen in parents with negative
childhood experiences but with coherent narratives and the ability to
provide a safe haven for their children. Earned autonomy is convincing
evidence that early negative experiences can be rein-tegrated and
repaired later in life. Personal growth has the ability to heal because
the social brain remains plastic. Attachment patterns formed in
childhood can be relatively stable into adulthood and have been shown to
impact romantic love, interpersonal attitudes, and psychiatric symptoms
(Brennan & Shaver, 1995; Hazan & Shaver, 1990). Adult children of
anxious parents repeatedly return to them throughout life, still seeking
comfort and a safe haven. Many of these children become parents to their
parents, taking care of the people they wish would and could care for
them. They continue to return to an empty well; each time the bucket is
lowered there is the hope that it will contain the nurturance they need.
Each returning empty bucket reinforces their lack of safety.

Child Therapists Treat people as if they were what they ought to be and
you help them to become what they are capable of being. ---Goethe A
question that commonly arises among therapists, adoptive parents, and
mental health legislators is, "When is it too late?" At what age do the
negative effects of early abuse, trauma, and neglect become permanent?
Getting to the heart of the issue, the true question becomes: Who is
worth seeing as a client, adopting as a child, or investing public funds
in for rehabilitation? In my mind, these are moral rather than
scientific questions. I have become very skeptical of "experts" who
think they have found answers to any issue in neuroscience. My bias is
to trust in plasticity and our own ingenuity to discover new solutions
to these problems. Here is a study that may give us some guidance as we
consider these issues. To test the impact of maternal deprivation, Harry
Harlow isolated newborn monkeys not only from their mothers, but from
any and all contact with other monkeys. Beyond minimal contact related
to taking care of their basic needs, these young monkeys were left alone
in a cage with a few toys and little else. Pictures of these isolate
monkeys are heartbreaking---they huddle in corners, rock, bite
themselves, and stay curled up in a fetal position. It is as if they are
trapped in an autistic hell waiting to be born into the social world.
When these isolated monkeys are then introduced into a standard monkey
colony at 6 months of age, they are understandably terrified. They don't
seem to understand what is going on, retreat from curious others, and do
their best to avoid interaction. At first it was tempting to think of
this 6month period as a cutoff point for attachment plasticity. Perhaps
attachment circuitry had gone through a hard-wired critical period and,
by 6 months, it was too late to learn how to be social. But as with
every conclusion in neuroscience, there needs to be caution. Harlow and
Suomi (1971) wondered if therapy could help these isolate monkeys
overcome their fear and allow them to join the social world of the
colony. But how do you do therapy with a monkey? Would you choose
Gestalt, cognitive-behavioral, or psychoanalytic treatment? Ultimately
what was chosen was a combination of play and attachment therapy. The

"therapists" chosen for the job were normal 3-month-old monkeys, who
were selected because they were smaller, craved playful contact, were
less aggressive, and probably less threatening than same-aged peers.
Therapy consisted of three 2-hour sessions per week for 4 weeks---a
total of 24 hours of "treatment." When the "therapists" arrived for the
session, the isolates were terrified and retreated. The therapists
approached, touched, and climbed on their older clients. The isolates
tried to retreat while their anxiety and self-stimulating behavior
increased. Again the therapists engaged, touched, climbed on, and got in
the face of their clients. Apparently, when it comes to play and social
engagement, a 3-month-old monkey won't take no for an answer. As the
sessions continued it was reported that the isolates gradually came to
habituate and accept their therapists' interventions. These interactions
interrupted autistic, selfstimulating behavior, and the clients
eventually began to initiate physical contact and interact with their
younger therapists. Therapy was so successful that the authors stated,
"By 1 year of age, the isolates were scarcely distinguishable from the
normal therapists in terms of frequencies of exploratory, locomotive,
and play behavior" (p. 1537). After a course of treatment, when these
former isolates were introduced to the colony, they did much better, and
were able to find a role within the group and social hierarchy. Were
they impaired? Most likely, early deprivation had a long-lasting impact,
but it appeared to the researchers that they had attained a functional
social recovery. These results surprised Harlow and Suomi because of
their prior assumptions about critical periods. They also help remind me
to keep an open mind, and remember that giving up on a child or client
is not something I am ever willing or prepared to do. Summary
Neuroscience suggests that an important aspect of love is the absence of
fear. If therapists and adoptive parents can create an environment that
minimizes fear and maximizes the positive neurochemistry of attachment
through human compassion, attachment circuitry can be stimulated to grow
in ways which are not only healing, but that allow victims of abuse and
neglect to risk forming a bond with another. Because the process of
attachment is, at heart, a way in which social animals initially
regulate fear, and later their affective lives, modifying

insecure attachment, first and foremost, requires the establishment of a
safe and secure relationship. Therapists work diligently to establish
this type of relationship for each client and to create an experience
similar to what the 3-month-old monkeys were able to give their senior
isolates: the experience of social connection in the absence of threat
or rejection. There are probably thousands of studies supporting what we
all intuitively know---childhood experience affects emotional and
physical health later in life. While there are plenty of psychological
and social theories that attempt to explain this relationship, we are
beginning to put together the biological mechanisms of action of these
findings. The general question is, how do early social experiences shape
our neurobiology in ways that can influence us decades later?
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 12

The Neurobiology of Attachment Offspring inherit, along with their
parents' genes, their parents, their peers, and the places they inhabit.
---Leon Eisenberg Reflected in the architecture of each of our brains is
the coming together of our evolutionary history, the generations
preceding our birth, and our unique relationship with our parents
(Eisenberg, 1995). Hundreds of studies have demonstrated the ways in
which early experience is correlated with physical and emotional health
later in life. Research in psychoanalysis, epidemiology, developmental
psychology, and psychiatry have all supported what we think of as common
sense: A good childhood is better than a bad one; positive parental
attention is important; and less stress early in life is a good thing.
Of course, each field explains these findings from its own theoretical
model and tends to see other perspectives as secondary. Recent research
in molecular biology offers us a groundbreaking view into the underlying
mechanism of the effects of early experience on genetic expression, that
is, how early experience triggers gene expression to guide our brains
onto particular adaptational trajectories. In contrast to the
correlations found in other fields of study, this new work explores
causal biological links between maternal behavior and the building of
the brains of children. When we think about having an internalized
mother, our thoughts usually stray to images of a kind smile, a warm
hug, feeling safe, and being loved. Depending on the culture, you may
remember your mom serving Thanksgiving dinner, stirring tomato sauce, or
frying chicken. Those of us who are less fortunate may have images of
rageful behavior, endless criticism, or a mother passed out on the couch
after a long day of drinking.

These conscious autobiographical memories are but one layer of an
internalized mother. Another level, deeper and just as meaningful, is
how these early experiences shaped the neurobiological processes of our
brains. In this chapter we climb up and down the evolutionary ladder
from humans to rats and back again to humans. It turns out that we have
learned a great deal by exploring how the behavior of mama rats
influences the brains of their pups. The conservation of structures and
functions during evolution provides us with a good animal model of the
effects of maternal behavior on the brain. Although this research has
yet to be done with humans, the behavioral and neurobiological parallels
between rats and humans are striking, making rats very helpful in
understanding the interpersonal aspects of neurobiology. We also explore
networks of the human brain that rely on similar shaping during early
experience, as well as some other ways in which epigenetics factors may
impact everything from the timing of menopause to human longevity. In
places, this chapter is heavy on the science, so be prepared to read
certain sections over a few times. I have put most of the specific data
in tables to act as an overview and guide to particular studies for
those who wish to do follow-up reading. The Evolution of Complexity Who
takes the child by the hand takes the mother by the heart. ---German
proverb Let's set the stage to look at these studies with the assumption
that our social brains have been shaped by natural selection because
being social enhances survival. Our best guess is that larger and more
complex brains allow for more diverse responses in challenging
situations and across diverse environments. Our brains allow us to
fashion clothing, build houses with heating systems, and create
sophisticated farming techniques that allow us to expand our habitats
and sources of food. But does this explain why we have relationships? We
know that the expansion of the cortex in primates correlates with
increasingly large social groups. The benefit of living in a tribe is
not just in the safety of numbers, but also in the ability of groups to
have task specialization such as hunting, gathering, and caretaking. So,
while many fish and reptiles need to be born immediately prepared to
take on the

challenges of survival, human infants have years of total dependency
during which their brains can grow and adapt to very specific
environments. This larger window of time for adult--child interactions
allows for increasingly sophisticated postnatal brain development and
increased investment in each child (Kaplan & Robson, 2002). This
expanded social investment enhances the child's chances of survival,
which in turn increases the chances of our genes surviving into the next
generation (Allen, Bruss, & Damasio, 2005; Charnov & Berrigan, 1993).
Thus, the development of the brain, group organization, caretaking, and
social communication co-evolved in a mutually interdependent manner.
There are many interesting theories about how humans evolved to be the
complex social creatures we are. The big story probably goes something
like this: Larger group size enhanced the probability of survival, but
required bigger and more complex brains to process social information,
and so larger brains were selected. More complex brains require longer
periods of development and result in prolonged periods of child
dependency. Longer periods of dependency require more attention and
dedication to nurturance, caretaking specialization, and social
structures that can support this specialization. As the size of primate
groups expanded, grooming, grunts, and hand gestures became inadequate
and were gradually shaped into spoken language. Complex social
structures encouraged the development of more sophisticated
communication, leading to the development of oral and written language.
As social groups grew in size and language became more complex, a larger
cortex was needed to process increasingly complex information. Language
and culture provide our expanding brains the ability to record and
accumulate history and information, and develop technology. The
accomplishments of culture allow for even greater group size and more
sophisticated brains.

It is very likely that some version of this evolutionary narrative
shaped the contemporary human brain. But despite some remarkable
advances, we have continued to be governed by the basic biological
principles of homeostasis, fundamental approach-avoidance choices, and
flows of electrical and chemical information throughout our brains and
bodies. Like every living system, from a single neuron to complex
ecosystems, the brain depends on interaction with other brains for its
survival. Because increasing complexity requires greater
interdependency, our brains have come to exist more and more profoundly
within a matrix of other brains. At birth, the human brain is dependent
on caretakers for its survival and growth. The prolonged and
sophisticated parenting that has evolved in primates scaffolds an
increasing amount of postnatal growth and development. This allows each
human brain to be a unique blending of nature and nurture as it builds
its structures through interactions and molding itself to its
environment. Parents' nonverbal communications and patterns of
responding to the infant's basic needs also shape the baby's perceptions
of the world and its sense of self. Because the first few years of life
are a period of exuberant brain development, early experience has a
disproportionate impact on the development of neural systems. Genes
first serve to organize the brain and trigger sensitive periods, while
experience orchestrates genetic transcription in the ongoing adaptive
shaping of neural systems, so that experience becomes the actual
hardware of our brains. This structure, in turn, organizes other brains,
allowing experiences to be passed through a group and carried forward
across generations. While being embedded in a group comes with many
challenges, it also comes with an ability to interactively regulate each
other's internal states and assist in neural integration. Environmental
Programming The group consisting of mother, father, and child is the
main educational agency of mankind. ---Martin Luther King Jr. The
transduction of bonding experiences into neurobiological structure is a
fascinating area of study. It carries deep implications for how
relationships throughout life impact our experience and thereby shape
our brains.

Michael Meaney and his colleagues have been studying this question in
great depth for many years. Their work has taken advantage of naturally
occurring variation in the maternal behavior of mother rats (dams) to
explore the impact of their ministrations on the brains of their pups.
Mother rats lick, nurse, and retrieve their pups when they roll out of
the nest. These three behaviors are easily observed and counted by
willing undergraduates, and correlated with behavioral and biological
variables in the brains of both mothers and children. The work of Meaney
and others has provided us with ample evidence that mother rats pass on
their genes through DNA and shape genetic expression through their
behavior. Environmental programming is a term used to describe this
orchestration of epigenetic factors during development (Fish et al.,
2004; Meaney & Szyf, 2005; Sapolsky, 2004). Thus, two mechanisms of
inheritance exist: slow changes across many generations through mutation
and natural selection, and rapid changes in genetic expression during
each generation (Clovis et al., 2005; Cameron et al., 2005; Meaney &
Szyf, 2005; Zhang, Parent, Weaver, & Meaney, 2004). Their research has
thus far revealed three primary ways in which maternal behavior impacts
variations in brain structure---learning and plasticity, the ability to
cope with stress, and later maternal behavior in adulthood. A mother's
impact on the way her daughter will mother her children serves as a
parallel channel of inheritance that is highly sensitive to
environmental conditions. Genetic expression is programmed by experience
through the alteration of the chromatin structure and the methylation of
DNA (Szyf, Weaver, & Meaney, 2007). In effect, the genome is like a
keyboard while these processes select the notes to be played.
Methylation is a process by which a methyl group is added to DNA. This
has been shown to be a reversible but stable modification to DNA that is
passed along to daughter cells and can lead to long-term gene silencing.
Low licking/grooming mothering results in increased glucocorticoid
receptor methylation, decreased glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression,
and an increased stress response. Licking/grooming decreases
methylation, increases GR expression and downregulates the stress
response (Weaver et al., 2007). So as we show affection and kindness to
our children, we may be building more resilient brains, an expression of
genetic variation that would likely have made Lamarck smile.

Three different research methods have been employed to study the effects
of maternal behavior on genetic expression. In the first model, the
amount of attention is measured and the behaviors and brains of pups in
high-and low-attention groups are compared. The second examines the
effects of periods of maternal deprivation, while the third uses
handling of the pups by human researchers as the experimental
manipulation. Because it has been found that human handling stimulates
more maternal attention, the first and third categories may turn out to
be one and the same (Garoflos et al., 2008). Levels of maternal
attention have been shown to either stimulate or silence gene expression
in the domains of neural growth and plasticity, modulation of
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) activity, and programming of future
maternal behavior (Szyf, McGowan, & Meaney, 2008). Neural growth is
stimulated via the activation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF), cFos, and messenger RNA expression in a variety of brain areas,
processes tied to the biochemistry of neuroplasticity and learning.
Stress reactivity is controlled via levels of benzodiazepine, oxytocin,
and glucocorticoid receptors in many regions of the brain. Higher levels
of maternal attention result in more of these receptors being formed,
allowing for the dampening of fear and anxiety and an increase in
exploratory behavior. Maternal behavior is governed by the growth and
activation of medial optic areas (the rats' version of our ompfc) as
well as the regulation of oxytocin and estrogen receptors (Neumann,
2008). See Table 12.1 for some of the specific findings in each area of
study. In essence, rats who receive more maternal attention have brains
that are more robust, resilient, and nurturing of others. They are able
to learn faster and maintain memories longer. They are less reactive to
stress and are thus able to use their abilities to learn at higher
levels of arousal and across more difficult situations. They will also
suffer less from the damaging effects of cortisol by downregulating it
sooner after a stress response. And finally, females growing up with
more attentive mothers pass these positive features on to their
children. The mechanisms for the association in humans between early
secure attachment and healthier minds and bodies is likely similar but
far more complex. TABLE 12.1 The Impact of Maternal Attention

Maternal Action

Study Findings

Neural Growth and Plasticity Licking Increased synaptic density, longer
dendritic branching, and increased neuronal survival1 Licking Increased
neuronal survival in the hippocampus2 Licking Fos expression in the
hippocampus and parietal and occipital cortex3 Licking/nursing Increased
NMDA and BDNF expression and increased cholinergic innervation of the
hippocampus4 Modulation of HPA Activity Licking Increased medial PFC
dopamine in response to stress and increased startle inhibition5
Licking/nursing Decreased fear reactivity 6 Licking/nursing Increased
epigenetic expression of glucocorticoid receptor gene promoter in the
hippocampus7 Licking/nursing Increased mRNA expression in medial
prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and the basolateral and central regions
of the amygdala8 Licking/nursing Increased levels of benzodiazepine
receptors in the lateral, central, and basolateral regions of the
amygdala and the locus coeruleus as well as increased levels of alpha 2
adrenoreceptor density and decreased CHR receptor density in the locus
coeruleus9 Modulation of Future Maternal Behavior Nursing call Enhanced
metabolic activation in precentral medial cortex, anterior cingulate
cortex, and lateral thalamus10 Licking Elevated levels of estrogen mRNA
and more maternal behavior later in life11 Licking/nursing Increased
levels of oxytocin and estrogen receptors in medial preoptic areas (and
increased maternal behavior

Licking

when they have their own pups)12 Less sexual behavior in females and
less likely to become pregnant after giving birth13

Maternal attention stimulates the expression of BDNF, the most abundant
neurotrophins in the brain. Among its many functions, BDNF modulates
glutamate-sensitive NMDA receptors which, in turn, regulate both
long-term potentiation, long-term depression, and neuroplasticity
(Alonso et al., 2002; Bekinschtein et al., 2008; Monfils, Cowansage, &
LeDoux, 2007). While cortisol inhibits the production of BDNF (and new
learning), higher levels of BDNF appear to both buffer the hippocampus
from stress and encourage ongoing plasticity (Pencea et al., 2001;
Radecki et al., 2005; Schaaf, de Kloet, & Vregendenhil, 2000). And
because the production of BDNF (and other neurotrophins) are under
epigenetic control, physical, emotional, and interpersonal experience
all influence their production and availability (Berton et al., 2006;
Branchi et al., 2004; Branchi, Francia, & Alleva, 2006). Many
researchers have found correlations between hippocampal volume and
symptoms of depression. While most stressful illnesses correlate with
reductions in hippocampal volume, there is speculation that depression
may be a result rather than a cause of hippocampal reduction. In other
words, the symptoms of depression are an experiential expression of a
shutdown of neuroplasticity. Thus, if our neurons become depressed, so
do we. Since depression is often a natural consequence of prolonged
stress, one mechanism of action linking the two may be the catabolic
impact of high levels of cortisol on the neurons within the hippocampus.
It is suspected that antidepressant SSRIs and physical activity work to
reverse the negative impact of cortisol in the hippocampus by triggering
BDNF synthesis (Fernandes et al., 2008; Russo-Neustadt et al., 2000;
Warner-Schmidt & Duman, 2006). Direct administration of BDNF has also
been shown to have long-lasting antidepressant effects (Hoshaw, Malberg,
& Lucki, 2005). While more maternal attention results in increased
growth and enhanced functioning throughout the pups' brains, separation
from mothers proves to have the opposite effects. The same three areas
that are upregulated with more maternal attention are all downregulated
by her absence. Deprivation of maternal attention increases neural and
glial death, while reducing gene

expression, impairing their ability to learn. Maternal separation also
results in reduced inhibitory (GABA) receptors in the locus coeruleus,
increasing adrenaline secretion in reaction to stress while reducing the
antianxiety properties of benzodiazepine receptors in the amygdala.
Decreased cortisol receptors in the hippocampus also impair the
inhibitory feedback to the stress system to shut down cortisol
production. See Table 12.2 for the specific studies from which this
information is taken. So again we see results that parallel findings
with human subjects where early maternal deprivation through separation
or depression results in decreased brain functioning, higher levels of
anxiety, and difficulty with subsequent attachment (Brennan et al.,
2008; Tyrka et al, 2008). TABLE 12.2 The Impact of Maternal Separation
Neural Growth and Plasticity Increased neuronal and glial death1
Decreased neurotrophin levels in ventral hippocampus2 Decreased glial
density3 Modulation of HPA Activity Reduced GABA receptors in the locus
coeruleus Decreased GABA receptor maturity Reduced benzodiazepine
receptors in the central and lateral amygdala and increased mRNA
expression in the amygdala4 Increased anxiety, fearfulness, and response
to stress5 Increased LTP and LTD in amygdalo-hippocampal synapses6
Decreased exploratory behavior, avoidance of novelty, and greater
vulnerability to addiction7 Reduced gene expression8 Greater cortisol
secretion in response to mild stress and increased startle response and
startle-induced sounds9 Reduced somatic analgesia and increased colonic
motility mimicking irritable bowel syndrome in humans10 Upregulation of
glutamate receptors11

Modulation of Future Maternal Behavior Decreased synaptic density in the
medial prefrontal cortex Decreased cell survival in maternal neural
networks12 Decreased activation in the Bed nucleus of the stria
terminalis and nucleus accumbens13 The evidence from the handling
studies is essentially the same as for highly attentive mothers in
neural health and the modulation of anxiety, supporting the idea that
they may both represent the effects of greater amounts of maternal
attention. More glucocorticoid receptors, lower cortisol levels, and
greater brain activity reflect a brain geared toward less anxiety,
helplessness, and fear. In turn, these pups are more resilient, engage
in more complex exploratory behavior, and are better learners than their
nonhandled siblings. Similar results have also been discovered in
parrots and pigs (see Table 12.3). TABLE 12.3 The Impact of Human
Handling on Rats, Pigs, and Parrots Modulation of HPA Activity Rat pups
Increased concentrations of glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampus
and frontal lobes1 Increased glucocorticoid receptor binding capacity in
the hippocampus2 Increased corticotrophin-releasing factor mRNA and
greater CRF levels3 Decreased inhibitory avoidance and increased object
recognition4 Lower levels of stress in reaction to a predatory odor5
Increased neurotrophin-3 expression and neuronal activation in
hippocampus and parietal lobes6 Low cortisol secretion in response to
stress/high exploratory behavior 7 Protection against age-related
neuroendocrine and behavioral decline with age8 Decreased helplessness
behaviors9

Baby pigs Lower basal and free plasma levels of cortisol10 Amazon
parrots Decreased serum cortisol levels in response to stress11 These
and other studies support the belief that the reaction of the brain to
maternal attention is not an abstract theory but a well-documented
phenomenon. The consistency of behavioral, emotional, and biological
findings across species is too powerful to be discounted. In fact, over
900 genes have been discovered that are differentially expressed based
on the amount of maternal behavior (Rampon et al., 2000; Weaver et al.,
2006). And there is no reason to believe that the maternal control of
epigenetic expression has not been conserved in primates and humans.
Rhesus monkeys deprived of maternal contact demonstrate reduced
transcriptional efficiency of serotonin and its receptors in the brain
(Bennett et al., 2002). We do know that low levels of caring maternal
behavior in humans correlate with more fearful behavior, less positive
joint attention, and right-biased frontal activation, all of which are
related to higher levels of stress and arousal (Hane & Fox, 2006).
Self-esteem and locus of control have been found to correlate with
hippocampal volume, which we know is tied to cortisol regulation
(Pruessner et al., 2005). In my mind, the parallels as well as the
tendency for evolution to conserve such mechanisms form a strong case
for the theory that what Meaney and his colleagues are finding in rats
is at work in humans. In an exciting twist, it has been found that
biological interventions and enriched social and physical environments
can reverse the effects of low levels of maternal attention and early
deprivation on both HPA activity and behavior (Bredy et al., 2004;
Francis et al., 2002; Hood, Dreschel, & Granger, 2003; Szyf et al.,
2005; Weaver et al., 2005). Unfortunately, chronic stress or trauma in
adolescence and adulthood can also reverse the positive effects of
higher levels of attention earlier in life, shaping a brain that
resembles one that was deprived of early maternal attention (Ladd,
Thrivikraman, Hout, & Plotsky, et al., 2005). These studies all support
the notion that our brains are capable of continual adaptation in both
positive and negative directions and that successful psychotherapy, one
that

establishes a nurturing relationship, may well be capable of triggering
genetic expression in ways that can decrease stress, improve learning,
and establish a bridge to new and healthier relationships. Keep in mind
that the amount of attention that a mother rat shows her pups exists in
a broad adaptational context. Highly stressed mothers demonstrate lower
rates of licking and grooming, which prepare her pup's brains for living
in a stressful environment. In other words, under adverse conditions,
maternal behavior decreases, which programs her offspring for enhanced
reactivity to stress. This likely increases the probability of survival
while simultaneously elevating the risk of physical and emotional
pathology later in life (Diorio & Meaney, 2007). The impact of neonatal
handling is also different for male and female pups, reflecting their
divergent adaptational roles and contributions to the survival of their
species (Park, Hoang, Belluzzi, & Leslie, 2003; Ploj et al., 2001;
Stamatakis et al., 2008). All of this suggests that the level of
maternal behavior is interwoven into a matrix of adaptation choices that
vary based on external factors. The fact that processes that are set in
motion early in life can be modified by subsequent experience
demonstrates the ability to adapt to a changing environment. This work
with rats has established guidelines for future exploration into
environmental programming in humans. There are obvious limitations to
research with humans that requires physical examination of the brain. We
will have to rely on samples of opportunity and utilize careful
methodological controls to be certain of the quality of results. One
such study compared the brains of suicide victims with normal controls
and found lower mRNA levels of BDNF and trkB in the suicide victims,
both of which are involved in neuronal health and plasticity. These data
raise the possibility that early environmental programming may have made
them susceptible to depression and suicide (Dwivedi et al., 2003). A
more recent study compared the brains of suicide victims with and
without histories of child abuse and found that those with histories of
early abuse demonstrated decreased levels of glucocorticoid receptor
mRNA, receptor expression, and growth factor transcription when compared
to those without abuse (McGowan et al., 2009). These studies are highly
supportive of our ability to apply animal research to humans.

Attachment and the Human Brain What I do and what I dream include thee,
as the wine must taste of its own grapes. ---Elizabeth Barret Browning
It turns out that gene expression in response to close contact is a
twoway street. Giving birth and exposure to children changes the brains
of parents and caretakers in ways that support bonding, attachment, and
nurturance. A primary discovery in mother rats has been the remodeling
and expansion of the hippocampus in preparation for locating, storing,
and retrieving greater amounts of food (Pawluski & Galea, 2006). Contact
with her pups causes increased growth in the medial preoptic area,
basolateral amygdala, and parietal and prefrontal cortex as the brain
expands to incorporate these new beings into the self-experience of the
mother (Fleming & Korsmit, 1996; Kinsley et al., 2006; Lonstein et al.,
1998). Even virgin rats who are given pups to care for experience
increased dendritic growth and neuronal excitation in superoptic areas
(Modney, Yang & Hatton, 1990; Modney & Hatton, 1994; Salm, Modney, &
Hatton, 1988). Thus, just as in children, interpersonal contact changes
the brains of parents. It has been shown that when human mothers hear
their infants cry, there is an increase in activity in their right
medial prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate---regions known to
mediate maternal response (Lorberbaum et al., 1999). Watching a video of
their own infant will stimulate activity in the right anterior temporal
pole, left amygdala, and both right and left ompfc (Minagawa-Kawai et
al., 2008; Nitschke et al., 2004; Ranote et al., 2004). It is likely
that just as maternal attention triggers epigenetic factors in children,
caring for children may also change genetic expression in their
caretakers. The grandmother gene hypothesis suggests that human women
experience early menopause to be available to help nurture their
grandchildren and avoid the risks inherent in mating and childbirth,
which rise with age for both mother and child (Lee, 2003; Rogers, 1993;
Turke, 1997). In essence, the grandmother gene hypothesis suggests that
early menopause has been shaped by natural selection to enhance the
survival rate of a woman's children's children. Sear, Mace, and McGregor
(2000) studied tribal life in rural Gambia where families live at the
level of subsistence and depend upon one another

for basic survival. Their lifestyle is likely similar to the social and
environmental context of most of our evolutionary history. The results
of their research show that nutritional status, height, and the
probability of survival of their young were significantly correlated
with the presence of postmenopausal maternal grandmothers. On the other
hand, the presence of fathers, paternal grandmothers, or other male kin
had a negligible impact on either the nutritional status or survival
rates of offspring. Similar findings have been obtained in studies of
hunter-gatherer populations of Tanzania, premodern Japan, Canada, and
Finland, and contemporary urban populations in the United States
(Hawkes, O'Connell, & Jones, 1997; Lahdenperä et al., 2004; Pope et al.,
1993). Besides the timing of menopause, is it possible that women live
longer because they are traditionally involved in caring for their
young? That is, is there a health benefit involved in taking care of
children because of the neurobiological processes it stimulates in our
brains and bodies? Some interesting evidence that may support a
connection between child care and longevity comes from looking at
parenting responsibilities across different species of primates. A
longevity advantage for females does exist in gorillas, orangutans, and
humans, in which they are the primary caretakers. On the other hand, in
species such as the owl and titi monkey, where the male is the primary
caretaker of infants, males tend to survive longer. In Goeldi monkeys,
where caretaking is shared, the longevity for both genders is equivalent
(see Table 12.4). TABLE 12.4 Child Care and Longevity Across Primate
Species Primate Chimpanzee Spider monkey Orangutan Gorilla Gibbon Human

Female/Male Survival Ratio 1.418 1.272 1.203 1.199 1.125 1.052--1.082

Male Care Rare Rare None Pair-living, little direct role Protects and
plays with offspring Supports economically, some

Goeldi monkey Siamang Owl monkey Titi monkey

0.974

care Both parents carry infant

0.915 0.869 0.828

Carries infant in second year Carries infant from birth Carries infant
from birth

Adapted from Allman, Rosin, Kumar, & Hasenstaub, 1998. Given the amount
of data supporting the beneficial effects of secure attachment,
caretaking, human touch, and social support, it is plausible that
nurturing, emotional attunement, and physical contact have salubrious
effects that may provide primary caretakers with a survival advantage.
It is possible that attachment bonds, caretaking experiences, and the
neurochemicals and epigenetic phenomena they impact may well enhance our
health and survival. Perhaps caring for our children and grandchildren
may be more supportive of health and longevity than cholesterol
medication and treadmills. Interestingly, women who give birth after the
age of 40 are almost four times more likely to live to be 100 years old
(Perls, Alpert, & Fretts,1997). While this is usually explained in terms
of the protective nature of birthrelated hormones, their enhanced
longevity may be part of broader biological and psychological processes
involved in intense caretaking (King & Elder, 1997). It is a good bet
that taking care of a child tells the brain and body to trigger
epigenetic and biochemical processes that enhance health and slow down
aging. The Human Social Brain It is good to rub and polish our brains
against those of others. ---Montaigne We have seen a great deal of
evidence of the impact of early nurturance on the shaping of the social
brain and its emotional circuitry. So when our early relationships are
frightening, abusive, or nonexistent, our brains

dutifully adapt to the realities of our unfortunate situations. However,
there is reason to believe that these circuits retain
experience-dependent plasticity throughout life, especially in close
relationships (Bowlby, 1988; Davidson, 2000). Experience-dependent
plasticity has been found in many areas of the brain, including the
prefrontal cortex and hippocampus (Kolb & Gibb, 2002; Maletic-Savatic,
Malinow, & Svoboda, 1999). These structures, central to learning and
memory, are also key in shaping attachment schema. Further, research is
emerging that in the transition from dating to marriage, there is a
broad tendency to move from insecure and disorganized attachment schema
to increasingly secure patterns (Crowell, Treboux, & Waters, 2002). On
the other hand, social stress inhibits cell proliferation and neural
plasticity, while social support, compassion, and kindness support
positive neural growth (Czéh et al., 2007; Davidson, Jackson, & Kalin,
2000). While rats possess the basic mechanisms of bonding and maternal
behavior, our brains have more elaborate and sophisticated mechanisms
for attachment. In fact, the human brain is criss-crossed with neural
networks dedicated to receiving, processing, and communicating messages
across the social synapse. The difference in humans is that the
environmental programming of these experience-dependent circuits is far
more lengthy and complex. Networks of our complex social brains include
brain regions, neural systems, and regulatory networks listed in Table
12.5. These are the same circuits that therapists attempt to influence
in reshaping the brain in ways which lead to more positive adaptation
later in life. The idea that psychotherapy is a kind of reparenting may
be more than a metaphor; it may be precisely what we are attempting to
accomplish at the level of the epigenome. This research establishes
attention, care, and nurturance as a way to influence the very structure
of our brain and places psychotherapy at the heart of biological
interventions. It is odd to think that Carl Rogers may someday find a
place next to Crick and Watson in the pantheon of biologists. Now let's
shift our attention to the structures of the human brain that organize
attachment, affect regulation, and the modulation of stress. For a more
in-depth exploration of the social brain, see The Neuroscience of Human
Relationships (Cozolino, 2006). Keep in mind that, just as in rats,
these systems are also built by the attachments they come to control.
Thus,

our learning history comes to be reflected in the architecture of our
neural systems. TABLE 12.5 Structures and Systems of the Social Brain
Cortical and Subcortical Structures Orbital and medial prefrontal
cortices (ompfc) Cingulate cortex and spindle (Von Economo) cells Insula
cortex Somatosensory cortex Amygdala, hippocampus Hypothalamus Sensory,
Motor, and Affective Systems Face recognition and expression reading
Imitation, mirroring, and resonance systems Regulatory Systems
Attachment, stress and fear regulation (orbital medial prefrontal
cortex-- amygdala balance) Social engagement (the vagal system of
autonomic regulation) Social motivation (reward representation and
reinforcement)

Cortical and Subcortical Structures The prehistorical and primitive
period represents the true infancy of the mind. ---James Baldwin The
ompfc, insula, and cingulate cortices---the most evolutionarily
primitive areas of the cortex---lie buried beneath and within the folds
of the later evolving cortex. In fact, some neuroanatomists see these
contiguous structures as comprising a functional system called the basal
forebrain (Critchley, 2005; Heimer & Van Hoesen, 2006). The ompfc sits
at the apex

of the limbic system. As a convergence zone for polysensory, somatic,
and emotional information, it is in the perfect position to synthesize
information from both our internal and external worlds. In its position
at the apex of the limbic system, the ompfc's inhibitory role in
autonomic functioning highlights its contribution to the organization of
behavior and affect regulation. The ompfc allows us to translate the
punishment and reward values of complex social information such as
facial expressions, gestures, and eye contact into meaningful
information, associate it with our own emotions, and thus organize
attachment schema (O'Doherty et al., 2001; Tremblay & Schultz, 1999;
Zald & Kim, 2001). The ompfc also mediates emotional responses and
coordinates the activation and balance of the sympathetic and
parasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system (Hariri et al.,
2000; Price, Carmichael & Drevets, 1996). The cingulate cortex is a
primitive association area of visceral, motor, tactile, autonomic, and
emotional information that begins to participate in brain activity
during the second month of life (Kennard, 1955). It first appeared
during evolution in animals exhibiting maternal behavior, play, and
nursing, and when making sounds became involved with communication
between predator and prey, potential mates, and mother and child
(MacLean, 1985). The caretaking and resonance behaviors made possible by
the cingulate also provide an important component of the neural
infrastructure for social cooperation and empathy (Rilling et al., 2002;
Vogt, 2005). Destruction of the anterior cingulate in mammals results in
mutism, a loss of maternal responses, infant death due to neglect, and
emotional and autonomic instability (Bush, Luu, & Posner, 2000; Bush et
al., 2002; Paus, Petrides, Evans, & Meyer, 1993). The anterior cingulate
contains spindle-shaped neurons that appear to have evolved in humans
and great apes to connect and regulate divergent streams of information
(Nimchinsky et al., 1995, 1999). These cells may provide the neural
connectivity necessary both for the development of selfcontrol and the
ability to engage in sustained attention to difficult problems (Allman
et al., 2001, 2005). Spindle cells are especially fascinating because
they emerge after birth and are experience-dependent. Early neglect,
stress, and trauma may negatively impact the development and
organization of the anterior cingulate and spindle cells, resulting in
lifelong cognitive deficits,

and emotional functioning may be based on the construction and health of
these structures (Cohen et al., 2006; Ovtscharoff, Helmeke, & Braun,
2006). The insula begins life on the lateral surfaces of the brain, only
to become hidden by the rapid expansion of the frontal and temporal
lobes. The insula is sometimes described as the "limbic integration
cortex" because of its massive connections to all limbic structures, and
its feedforward links with the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes
(Augustine, 1996). It provides the brain with a means to connect
primitive bodily states with the experience and expression of bodily
awareness, emotion, and behavior (Carr et al., 2003; Phan et al., 2002).
In tandem with the anterior cingulate, the insula allows us to be aware
of what is happening inside of our bodies and reflect on our emotional
experiences (Bechara & Naqvi, 2004; Critchley et al., 2004; Gundel,
Lopez-Sala, Ceballos-Baumann, 2004). Damage to the right insula can
result in anosognosia, a condition where a patient seems unaware of and
unfazed by severe paralysis on the left side of the body (Garavan, Ross,
& Stein, 1999). Recent research suggests that the insula is involved
with mediating the entire range of emotions from disgust to love
(Bartels & Zeki, 2000; Calder et al., 2003). The somatosensory cortex,
located along the front of the parietal lobes, processes information
about bodily experiences. It lies just behind the central gyrus and
wraps deep within the Sylvian fissure that divides the parietal from the
frontal lobes. Along with the insula and anterior cingulate cortices, it
contains multiple representations of the body that process and organize
our experience of touch, temperature, pain, joint position, and our
visceral state. These different processing streams combine to create our
experience of our physical selves. It also participates in what we call
intuition or gut feelings by activating implicit memories related to our
experiences and helping us to make decisions guided by feelings
(Damasio, 1994). The experience of our own bodies becomes the model for
our understanding and empathy with others (Damasio et al., 2000).
Working in concert with the ompfc, the subcortical amygdala is another
core component of the social brain. The amygdala achieves a high degree
of maturity by the eighth month of gestation, allowing it to associate a
fear response to a stimulus prior to birth (LaBar et al., 1995; Ulfig,
Setzer, & Bohl, 2003). As a primitive organ of appraisal, the amygdala
closely monitors signals of safety and danger and mediates the
fight-or-flight response via the autonomic nervous system (Davis, 1997;
Ono, Nishijo, &

Uwano, 1995; Phelps & Anderson, 1997). The ompfc can inhibit the
amygdala based on conscious awareness and feedback from the environment
(Beer et al., 2003). By the same token, when we are frightened and our
amygdala is activated, it inhibits the ompfc and we have a difficult
time being rational, logical, and in control of our thoughts. The
amygdala also appears to contribute to our conscious experience of both
emotional and physical pain (Mitra & Sapolsky, 2008; Neugebauer, Li,
Bird, & Han, 2004). Since the networks connecting the ompfc and the
amygdala are shaped by experience, our learning history of what is safe
and dangerous, including our attachment schema, is thought to be encoded
within this system. The hippocampus is situated at the junction between
the cortex and limbic system on both sides of the brain. In lower
mammals like the rat, the hippocampus is a specialized spatial map of
foraging territory. In humans, the parietal lobes evolved from the
hippocampus and assist it in complex visual-spatial processing. The
human hippocampus, along with its adjacent structures (parahippocampal
gyrus, dentate gyrus), have come to be specialized in the organization
of spatial, sequential, and emotional learning and memory (Edelman,
1989; McGaugh et al., 1993; Sherry et al., 1992; Zola-Morgan & Squire,
1990). In contrast to the amygdala, the hippocampus is a late bloomer,
continuing to mature into early adulthood along with the dlpfc
connections upon which it relies (Benes, 1989). Our lack of conscious
memory for early childhood, known as childhood amnesia, is likely due to
the slow developmental course of the hippocampus (Fuster, 1996; Jacobs
et al., 2000; McCarthy, 1995). The hypothalamus is a small and ancient
structure that sits at the center of the brain below the thalamus and
halfway between the cortex and the brainstem. It has extensive
connections with the structures of the social brain within the frontal
lobes, limbic system, and brainstem. I include the hypothalamus as part
of the social brain because it is centrally involved with the
translation of conscious experience into bodily processes and thus, the
transduction of early experience into the building of the brain and
body. Its various nuclei organize many bodily functions such as
temperature regulation, hunger, thirst, and activity level. The
hypothalamus is also involved in the regulation of sexual behavior and
aggression. As the head of the HPA axis, it translates brain processes
into hormonal secretions from the anterior pituitary. Among the hormones
produced by the pituitary, follicle-

stimulating hormone and prolactin are involved in reproduction and
nursing. Adrenocorticotropic hormone, which is sent to the adrenal
glands via the blood stream, stimulates the production of cortisol,
which we will be discussing in depth later as it relates to caretaking
and early stress. Sensory, Motor, and Affective Systems Common Sense is
that which judges the things given to it by other senses. ---Leonardo da
Vinci It is in the temporal lobes that our senses are integrated,
organized, and combined with primitive drives and emotional significance
in a "vertical" linkup across all three levels of the triune brain
(Adams, Victor, & Ropper, 1997). For example, the recognition of faces
and reading their expressions occurs in the top-down networks. Cells
involved in both reading and identifying facial expressions are located
in adjacent areas of the temporal lobes (Desimone, 1991; Hasselmo,
Rolls, & Baylis, 1989). When we see faces, the areas of the brain that
become activated lie in a processing stream dedicated to the
identification of visual stimuli (Lu et al., 1991). The association
region of the occipital lobe dedicated to the identification of faces is
the fusiform face area (Gauthier et al., 2000; Halgren et al., 1999).
These areas, in turn, are interconnected with other clusters of cells
that are responsible for eye gaze, body posture, and facial expression
as the brain constructs complex perceptions and social judgments from
basic building blocks of visual information (Jellema, Baker, Wicker, &
Perrett, 2000). Regions in the anterior (front) portions of the superior
temporal sulcus (STS) integrate information about various aspects of the
same person (form, location, and motion), allowing us to identify others
from different angles, in various places, and while they are in motion
(Jellema, Maassen, & Perrett, 2004; Pelphrey et al., 2003; Vaina et al.,
2001). The STS also contains mirror neurons, which activate either when
we witness others engaging in behaviors or when we ourselves
subsequently engage in these actions. By bridging neural networks
dedicated to perception and movement, mirror neurons connect the
observed and the observer by linking visual and motor experience.
Resonance behaviors (based on mirror systems) are the reflexive
imitation responses we make when interacting

with others. It is hypothesized that mirror systems and resonance
behaviors provide us with a visceral-emotional experience of what the
other is experiencing, allowing us to know others from the inside out.
Regulatory Systems We gain our ends only with the laws of nature; we
control her only by understanding her laws. ---Jacob Bronowski The
body's regulatory systems are involved in the maintenance of internal
homeostatic processes, balancing approach and avoidance, excitation and
inhibition, and fight and flight responses. They also control
metabolism, arousal, and our immunological functioning. It is through
these systems that we regulate each other's biological and emotional
states. The Stress, Fear, and Attachment System I'm not afraid of
storms, for I'm learning how to sail my ship. ---Louisa May Alcott The
HPA system regulates the secretion of hormones involved with the body's
response to stress and threat. The immediate reaction to stress is vital
for short-term survival, while the rapid return to normalization after
the threat has passed is essential for long-term survival. Prolonged
stress results in system damage and breakdown. The long-term effects of
negative parenting experiences, failures of attachment, and early trauma
are mediated via the HPA system. In terms of fear, we turn again to the
amygdala, as it alerts a variety of brain centers that a fight-flight
response is required. In turn, the activation of the sympathetic branch
of the autonomic nervous system results in symptoms of anxiety,
agitation, and panic. The prime directive of the amygdala is to protect
us by pairing a stimulus with a fear response, and it works so fast that
this pairing can be created far ahead of our conscious perception of
threat. Throughout our lives, but especially during childhood,
relationships with others regulate our stress and fear. A secure
attachment indicates that we have learned to successfully utilize our
relationships with others to quell our fears and modulate our arousal.

The Social Engagement System Communication leads to community, that is,
to understanding, intimacy and mutual valuing. ---Rollo May The tenth
cranial nerve, also called the vagus, is actually a complex
communication system between the brain and multiple points within the
body including the heart, lungs, throat, and digestive system. Its
afferent (sensory) and efferent (motor) fibers allow for rapid
continuous feedback between brain and body to promote homeostatic
regulation and the optimal maintenance of physical health and emotional
well-being (Porges, Doussard-Roosevelt, & Maiti, 1994). The vagal system
is a central component of the autonomic nervous system. In the absence
of external challenge, the vagus works to enhance digestion, growth, and
social communication. When a challenge does arise, a decrease in vagal
activation facilitates sympathetic arousal, high energy output, and the
fight-flight response. Between rest and all-out activation, the vagus
allows us to maintain continued engagement by modulating arousal during
emotional interpersonal exchanges. The vagal system accomplishes this by
modulating and fine-tuning sympathetic arousal. Like the attachment
system described earlier, the development of this engagement system and
the fine-tuning of the vagal brake to regulate affect appear to depend
on the quality of attachment relationships in early childhood. This
allows us to internalize what we learn from experience with caretakers
into moment-to-moment somatic regulation. The vagal system also controls
the primary facial, mouth, and throat muscles involved in communication,
and links them with an awareness and control of internal states,
coordinating the cognitive and emotional processing necessary for
relationships. The "tone" of the vagus refers to the vagal system's
dexterity in regulating the heart and other target organs (Porges et
al., 1996). Inadequate development of this experience-dependent vagal
tone can impact all levels of psychosocial and cognitive development
(Porges et al., 1994). Children with poor vagal tone have difficulty in
suppressing emotions in situations demanding their attention, making it
difficult for them to engage with their

parents, sustain a shared focus with playmates, and maintain attention
on important material in the classroom (see Table 12.6 for more
details). Vagal regulation allows us to become upset, anxious, or angry
with a loved one without withdrawing or becoming physically aggressive.
We can hypothesize that many who engage in domestic violence, child
abuse, and other forms of aggressive behavior may not have had the kinds
of early attachment relationships required to build an adequate vagal
system. Thus, good parenting not only teaches appropriate responses in
challenging interpersonal situations, but it also builds vagal circuitry
required to stay engaged. TABLE 12.6 Correlates of Vagal Tone Higher
Vagal Tone Correlates With The ability to self-regulateIrritability
Self-soothing capacity by 3 months of age The range and control of
emotional states More reliable autonomic responses Suppression of heart
rate variability

Lower Vagal Tone Correlates With Irritability Behavioral problems at 3
years of age Emotional dysregulation Distractibility Hyper-reactivity to
environmental and visceral stimulii

Enhanced attentional capacity and the ability to take in information
Positive social engagement Withdrawal Increased behavioral organization
Impulsivity/acting out Consistent caretaking/secure attachment Insecure
attachment

The Social Motivation System Interdependence is and ought to be as much
the ideal of man as selfsufficiency. Man is a social being.

---Mohandas Gandhi Nelson and Panksepp (1998) postulated the existence
of a social motivation system modulated by oxytocin, vasopressin,
endogenous endorphins, and other neurochemicals related to reward,
decreased physical pain, and feelings of well-being. While conserved
from more primitive approachavoidance and pain regulation circuitry, the
social motivation system extends into the amygdala, anterior cingulate,
and orbital medial prefrontal cortex. These circuits and neurochemicals
are thought to regulate attachment, pair bonding, empathy, and
altruistic behavior (Decety & Lamm, 2006; Seitz, Nickel, & Azari, 2006).
In other words, as Fisher (1998) suggested, the social motivation system
can be divided into three categories: those involved in bonding and
attachment (regulated by peptides, vasopressin, and oxytocin),
attraction (regulated by dopamine and other catecholamines), and sex
drive (regulated by androgens and estrogens). The production of these
various biochemical elements, as well as the creation of their
receptors, are all subject to the influences of experience early in
life. In addition, the dopamine reward system of the subcortical area
known as the ventral striatum is involved with more complex analysis of
reward and social motivation. The ventral striatum becomes activated
with an expectation of a social reward, such as when we anticipate being
given candy or positive attention (Kampe et al., 2001; Pagnoni, Zink,
Montague, & Berns, 2002; Schultz et al., 1992). For example, once the
cortex has determined that we find someone attractive, the ventral
striatum becomes activated when they look our way, giving the signal
that the possibility for being rewarded with a desirable outcome has
increased (Elliott, Friston, & Dolan, 2000; Schultz, Dayan, & Montague,
1997; Schultz, 1998). The activation of the ventral striatum translates
the anticipation of reward into a physical impulse to approach. In this
way, those whom we find attractive actually exert what feels like a
gravitational pull on us. Summary Recent research has provided us with
new ways of understanding how early experience builds the brain.
Maternal attention has been linked to the neurobiology of systems
related to learning and memory, stress regulation,

and attachment behavior. Although the human brain is far more complex
than those of the animals upon whom this research has been conducted,
findings in human research across a broad array of disciplines
demonstrate consistent results in the areas of learning, resilience, and
attachment. The neural hubs and regulatory networks described here are
all built in an experience-dependent manner. That is, early
relationships shape the building of neural circuitry, which guides how
we are able to learn, react to stress, and attach to others in ways that
parallel those seen in the animal research discussed earlier. As we
learn more about the complexities of the human brain, we will understand
how relationships build the brain, and how love becomes flesh.
OceanofPDF.com

Part V.

The Disorganization of Experience

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 13

The Anxious and Fearful Brain Fear is the oldest and strongest emotion
of mankind. ---H. P. Lovecraft All animals have been shaped by evolution
to approach what is life sustaining and avoid what is dangerous. The
success of rapid and accurate approach-avoidance decisions determines if
an organism lives to reproduce and carry its genes forward to the next
generation. Because vigilance for danger is a central mechanism of the
process of natural selection, evolution may well favor an anxious gene
(Beck et al., 1979). Some anxieties appear to be hard wired, specific to
primates, and linked to both our present and past survival needs. Fear
of spiders, snakes, heights, and open and closed spaces all harken back
to the survival of our forest-dwelling ancestors. From an evolutionary
perspective, our complex neural systems have all been sculpted to better
serve the prime directive of survival. The neural circuitry involved in
fear and anxiety, although biased toward the right hemisphere, involves
both hemispheres and all levels of the triune brain. The most primitive
subcortical fight-or-flight circuitry, shared with our reptilian
ancestors, interacts with the most highly evolved regions of the cortex.
This results in the capacity to experience anxiety about everything from
an unexpected tap on the shoulder to an existential crisis. The
connection between every kind of anxiety and the core biological
mechanisms of physical survival supports the philosophical notion that
all anxiety, at its core, may be the fear of death (Tillich, 1974).
Anxiety and fear are the conscious emotional aspects of the body's
ongoing appraisal of threat, telling us to be prepared to take action.
Anxiety can be triggered by countless conscious or unconscious cues and
has the power to shape our behaviors, thoughts, and feelings. At its
most adaptive,

anxiety encourages us to step back from the edge of a cliff, or to check
to see if we signed our tax forms before sealing the envelope. At its
least adaptive, anxiety steers us away from taking important and
appropriate risks, pushing ourselves to reach personal goals, or
engaging in new and potentially beneficial behaviors. The response to
stress, or general adaptation syndrome (Selye, 1979), results in a range
of physiological changes designed to prepare the body for fight or
flight. Energy is mobilized through increased cardiovascular and
muscular tone, whereas digestion, growth, and immune responses are
inhibited. As part of the stress response, a cascade of biochemical
changes occur in the hypothalamus, pituitary, and adrenal glands (the
HPA axis), as well as in the sympathetic nervous system. These
biochemicals mediate the physical and psychological changes experienced
during stress. Increased levels of glucocorticoids, epinephrine, and
endogenous opioids are particularly relevant to a discussion of the
psychological impact of stress and trauma, in that they alter attention,
cognition, and memory. We experience the effects of the general
adaptation syndrome in situations such as automobile accidents, at
crucial moments during sporting events, or when engaging in public
speaking. The dangers can be real, imagined, or experienced vicariously
as we watch others in stressful or dangerous situations. With the
expansion of the cerebral cortex and the emergence of imagination, we
have become capable of being anxious about situations we will never
experience. We can now worry about monsters living under our beds and
the incineration of the earth resulting from the sun's expansion.
Because our imaginal capabilities have allowed for the construction of
the self, we can also become anxious about potential threats to our
psychological survival. Psychotherapists deal with a wide variety of
anxiety disorders based in the fear of a social death. The expectation
of rejection by another can result in social withdrawal; the fear of
forgetting one's lines in a play can result in stage fright. Systems of
physical survival have been conserved in the evolution of consciousness
and the ego, to be triggered when threats to these abstract
constructions are activated. Consciously experienced anxiety provides
the opportunity to face and work through one's fears. The common wisdom
of getting back on the horse that threw you is advice clearly aimed at
preventing the use of avoidance to control anxiety. In fact, the
reduction of anxiety through

avoidance reinforces the behavior and makes the feared stimulus seem all
the worse. Unfortunately, anxiety can be paired with all kinds of
automatic and internal sensations, emotions, and thoughts, which shape
behavior outside of conscious awareness. Compounding the problem, the
left hemisphere interpreter provides a rationale supporting and
reinforcing avoidance: "It's inhuman to ride horses!" "Who needs
planes?" "Why go out when it's so comfortable at home?" The avoidance of
thoughts and feelings associated with feared stimuli both reflects and
perpetuates a lack of integration among neural networks. Facing one's
fears is a core component of all forms of psychotherapy. We see this,
for example, with adult women who were sexually or emotionally abused as
children who sometimes come to therapy with chronic and severe weight
problems. They do well on diets until they begin to be noticed by men,
associated in implicit memory with the pain and shame of their childhood
experiences. These negative emotional reactions lead them to return to
behavioral patterns associated with an avoidance of such feelings, such
as eating. The act of eating is doubly reinforcing because it provides
nurturance, while gaining back the weight serves to protect against
sexual advances. Thus, what started out as a straightforward
survival-based alarm system has also become a nuisance. This is another
downside of the design compromises between speed and accuracy mentioned
earlier (Mesulam, 1998). Evolution designed a brain that reacts quickly
to a variety of subtle environmental cues. These same capabilities have
negative consequences when applied to a complex and largely nonconscious
psychological environment. An understanding of the neuroscience of
anxiety and fear is helpful in both the conceptualization and treatment
of most clinical disorders. In the following pages, we will look at the
two loops of fear circuitry outlined by Joseph LeDoux, the role of the
amygdala in the regulation of fear and anxiety proposed by Michael
Davis, and Robert Sapolsky's work on the negative impact of long-term
stress. Fast and Slow Fear Networks Fear is an emotion indispensible for
survival. ---Hannah Arendt

Through his research with animals, LeDoux (1994) demonstrated the
existence of two separate yet interrelated neural circuits which
regulate fear. The conservation of these systems during evolution allows
us to apply these findings to human experience (Phelps, Delgado,
Nearing, & LeDoux, 2004). The two systems (which we will call fast and
slow) each play a somewhat different role in our reaction to danger.
This model can be clinically useful for anxious and fearful clients by
helping them understand the neurobiological mechanisms underlying their
unsettling experiences. The reflexive fast system acts immediately,
sending information directly from the sense organs (eyes, ears, skin,
nose, tongue) through the thalamus to the amygdala. And when I say fast,
I mean fast: All of this processing can occur in one twelfth of a
second. The amygdala evaluates the sensory input and translates it into
bodily responses via its many connections with the autonomic nervous
systems. The thalamus may aid in this rapid evaluation by maintaining
crude representations of potentially dangerous things often encountered
in the environment such as spiders, snakes, and dangerous predators
(Brosch, Sander, & Scherer, 2007). These subcortical structures play an
executive role in rapid appraisal because the increased time it would
take to include the cortex might have too large a survival cost.
Simultaneously, the slow system sends sensory information on to the
hippocampus and cortex for further evaluation. This system is slower
because it contains more synaptic connections and involves conscious
processing. Cortical circuits of memory and executive processing examine
the information more carefully, compare it to memories of similar
situations, and decide how to proceed. The slow circuit aids in fear
processing by contextualizing the information in time and space. This
slow system in humans---with its apex in the prefrontal cortex---has the
additional task of making sense of the behavioral and visceral reaction
already set into motion by the fast systems. In this way, our conscious
executive functions discover the decisions that have already been made
by our unconscious executives. We find ourselves already scared when we
initially perceive what is frightening us; or ecstatic as our loved one
comes into view. Figure 13.1 depicts the neural circuits of the fast and
slow fear networks. This dual circuitry helps us to understand why we
often react to things before thinking and then have to apologize later
on. In therapy, we often attempt to utilize the conscious linguistic
structures of the slow circuit to

modify or inhibit dysfunctional reflexes and emotional appraisals of the
fast circuit. Coupled with relaxation techniques and enhanced awareness,
exposure to a feared stimulus can serve to enhance the regulatory input
of the slow cortical circuits by building new neural connections.
Cognitive and behavioral interventions therefore increase the ability of
the cortex to inhibit the amygdala. FIGURE 13.1 Fast and Slow Fear
Circuits A depiction of the two pathways of information to the
amygdala---one directly from the thalamus and the other through the
cortex and hippocampus (adapted from LeDoux, J. Emotion, memory, and the
brain. Copyright ©1994 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights
reserved.)

There are many examples of these two systems in action. I walked into my
garage one day to look for a tool when, out of the corner of my eye, I
saw a small brown object near my foot. There are plenty of little
critters in

my neighborhood and they often crawl, burrow, or fly into my house. I
immediately jumped back, my heart rate increased, my eyes widened, and I
became tense, ready to act. Moving backward, I oriented toward the
shape, saw that it looked more like a piece of wood than a rodent, and
began to relax. After a few seconds, my heart rate and level of arousal
were back to normal; the potential danger had passed. Analyzing this
experience in terms of the two systems, my peripheral vision saw the
object and my amygdala appraised it in an overgeneralized fashion to be
a threat. My amygdala activated a variety of sympathetic responses
including startle, increased respiration, and avoidance. In the split
second while my body was reacting, I reflexively oriented my head toward
the shape, which brought it to the fovea of my retina, providing my
hippocampus and cortex with more detailed visual information, allowing
them to appraise it more accurately than my skittish amygdala. I suppose
that a species-specific fear accounts for such a strong reaction to an
animal weighing just a few ounces. This example, trivial as it may be,
leads to a more serious application of LeDoux's theory to interpersonal
relationships. As the core of our social brain, the amygdala organizes
the appraisals of what we have learned from our relationship history. In
interpersonal situations, our amygdala reflexively and unconsciously
appraises others in the context of our past experiences. From moment to
moment, the reflexive activations of our fast systems (organized by past
learning) shape the nature of our present experience (Bar et al., 2006).
This is a powerful mechanism by which our early social learning
influences our experience of the present. So, by the time we become
conscious of others, our brain has already made decisions about them. In
the case of prejudice, skin color triggers a set of assumptions upon
which we evaluate other people (Olsson, Ebert, Banaji, & Phelps, 2005).
At the opposite extreme, love at first sight is a sort of positive
prejudice triggered by emotional memories projected onto another person.
The Amygdala's Role in Anxiety and Fear No passion so effectually robs
the mind of all its powers of acting and reasoning as fear. ---Edmund
Burke

The amygdala plays a central role in the activation of fear. It has been
conserved and expanded during evolution in order to process increasingly
complex cognitive, sensory, and emotional input. Its central role in
appraisal and the triggering of the biochemical cascade of the
fight-or-flight response makes it vital for processing memory, emotional
regulation, bonding, and attachment. Electrical stimulation of the
amygdala's central nucleus results in the experience of fear, whereas
destruction of the amygdala will eliminate fear reactions altogether
(Carvey, 1998). In fact, the destruction of the amygdala in animals
results in an inability to acquire a conditioned fear response. Although
we are genetically programmed to become anxious about things like snakes
or abandonment, fear can be learned by pairing any thought, feeling, or
sensation with a noxious stimulus, such as a loud noise or an electric
shock (Corcoran & Quirk, 2007). Learning to be anxious can occur at
conscious and unconscious levels related to both internal and external
stimuli. Like the hippocampus, the lateral areas of the amygdala are
capable of long-term potentiation (LTP) involved in reinforcing
connections among neurons. Remember that LTP is the process through
which the association among neurons becomes strengthened and learning is
established. The amygdala can learn, throughout life, to pair any
stimulus (even physical affection or praise) with fear. As we saw
earlier in our discussion of memory, the hippocampus and amygdala
organize interacting but dissociable systems of memory. Bechara and
colleagues (1995) reported that a patient with bilateral (left and
right) amygdala damage was unable to acquire a conditioned autonomic
response to sensory stimuli. The patient was, however, able to
consciously remember the conditioning situation because his hippocampi
were still intact. Another patient with bilateral damage to the
hippocampus showed no conscious memory for the conditioning situation
but did acquire autonomic and behavioral conditioning. The authors
concluded that the amygdala is "indispensable" for coupling emotional
conditioning with sensory information while the hippocampus is required
for conscious recollection (Bechara et al., 1995). The neural
projections from the amygdala to numerous anatomical targets cause the
multiple physical expressions of anxiety, fear, and panic. Projections
from the amygdala to the lateral hypothalamus result in sympathetic
activation responsible for increased heart rate and blood

pressure. The amygdala's stimulation of the trigeminal facial motor
nerve even causes the facial expressions of fear (Davis, 1992). The
amygdala is also essential in reading the fearful facial expressions of
others (Baird et al., 1999). As you can see from Figure 13.2, the
amygdala is well connected, making the fear response a powerful
whole-body experience. FIGURE 13.2 Some Targets of the Amygdala in the
Fear Response Some of the many anatomical targets of the amygdala in the
fear response, and their biological and behavioral contribution.

The triggering of the autonomic nervous system by the amygdala causes a
racing heart, sweating, and other physiological symptoms as the body
prepares for fight or flight. In the absence of real external danger,
this is experience is called a panic attack. Sufferers often go to
emergency rooms

thinking they are having a heart attack. Individuals with panic disorder
have increased neural activity in the amygdala (Reiman et al., 1989).
Psychologically, victims report a sense of impending doom, feelings of
unreality, and the thought that they are going crazy. Panic attacks are
often triggered by stress or other conflicts in the sufferer's life, but
he or she seldom makes the connection between these events and the panic
attacks. Because the neural connections are contained within hidden
neural layers, they are experienced as "coming out of the blue," leaving
victims struggling to comprehend what is happening to them. The
amygdala's tendency toward generalization results in panic being
triggered by an increasing number of internal and external cues (Douglas
& Pribram, 1966). Because panic attacks are experienced as unpredictable
and life threatening, they result in a limitation of activities.
Agoraphobia, or fear of open spaces, develops as victims of panic
attacks associate fear with a broader variety of situations. Hoping to
avoid these attacks, sufferers restrict their activities to the point
where they eventually become housebound. Simultaneously, the amygdala
becomes conditioned to respond faster in people who become phobic,
creating a vicious cycle of anxiety and fear (Larson et al., 2006). The
behavior of these individuals becomes so shaped by fear that they come
to avoid most of life. On the other hand, those of us with a slower and
less active amygdala experience greater psychological well-being (van
Reekum et al., 2007). One gift of aging is that the amygdala also
appears to become less sensitive to fear as we grow older. The
development and connectivity of the amygdala have many implications for
both early child development and psychotherapy. Without the inhibitory
impact of the later-developing hippocampal-cortical networks, early fear
experiences are unregulated, overwhelming full-body experiences. Because
the amygdala is operational at birth, the experience of fear may be the
strongest early emotion. Part of the power of early emotional learning
may be the intensity of these unregulated negative affects in shaping
early neural infrastructure. The infant is very dependent on caretakers
to modulate these powerful experiences. Amygdalaand hippocampus-mediated
memory systems are dissociable from one another, which means that early
and traumatic memories can be stored without conscious awareness or
cortical control. They will not be consciously

remembered, but instead will emerge as sensory, motor, and emotional
memories like traumatic flashbacks. Another limbic structure closely
connected to the amygdala is the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis
(BNST). Like the amygdala, it is connected upward to the prefrontal
cortex, as well as down into the autonomic nervous system. Unlike the
amygdala, the BNST is sensitive to abstract cues and is capable of
long-term activation, suggestive of both its later evolution and its
role in anticipatory anxiety (Davis, 1998; Kalin et al., 2001). It
appears that perhaps the amygdala specializes in fear while the BNST
evolved to deal with the more complex triggers for anxiety that emerged
as our brains became capable of imagining multiple potential outcomes.
Interestingly, the BNST in rats is a structure that grows in response to
maternal responsibilities. We have to wonder if, as the brain became
specialized for caretaking, the scaffolding we need to create around our
children pushed the evolution of a constant focus on potential dangers.
The Locus Coeruleus and Norepinephrine Worry gives a small thing a big
shadow. ---Swedish proverb One important descending projection from the
amygdala and BNST connects them with the locus coeruleus (LC). The LC is
a small structure with extensive projections throughout the brainstem,
midbrain, and cerebral cortex. It is, in fact, connected with more parts
of the brain than any other structure so far discovered (Aston-Jones,
Valentino, VanBockstaele, & Meyerson, 1994). The LC is the brain's
primary generator of norepinephrine (NE), which drives the activity of
the sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system responsible for
the fight-or-flight response. One effect of NE is to enhance the firing
of neurons that are highly relevant to a present experience based on
past learning (past fear responses), while inhibiting those involved in
baseline activities. This means that stimulation of the LC prepares us
for danger by activating circuits dedicated to attention and preparation
for action. NE activation makes us become vigilant, scan for danger, and
maintain a posture of tense readiness. It also heightens our memory for
danger, creating a sort of "print now" command for amygdala memory
circuits

(Livingston, 1967). The pathways containing these traumatic memories
become hyperpotentiated, meaning that they are more easily triggered by
less severe subsequent stressors. This allows us to be reminded in the
future of similar dangers. During times of lowered hippocampal-cortical
involvement (e.g., intoxication or near-sleep states), these stressful
traumatic memories may become disinhibited as intrusive images and
flashbacks. Translated into human and clinical terms, this means that
surges of NE during periods of safety may result in past traumatic
associations (anxiety, startle, visual images, etc.) being brought to
awareness, which overshadow current experiences. Stimulating the LC in
animals results in a disruption of ongoing behavior and triggering of an
orienting reflex, like the one I had to the small piece of wood. This is
seen in patients with PTSD who respond to traumarelated cues decades
after their traumatic experience. LC activity in primates results in a
high degree of vigilance while interrupting sleep, grooming, and eating.
Through a series of connections, the central nucleus of the amygdala
stimulates the LC, which, in turn, is thought to be a major control area
of the sympathetic nervous system (Aston-Jones et al., 1994). An
understanding of the biochemistry and functioning of the LC is an
important component of any theory of causes of anxiety disorders
(Svensson, 1987). Stress and the Hippocampus Anxiety is a thin stream of
fear trickling through the mind. If encouraged, it cuts a channel into
which all other thoughts are drained. ---Arthur Somers Roche The human
brain is well equipped to survive brief periods of stress without
long-term damage. In an optimal state, stressful experiences can be
quickly resolved with good coping skills and the help of caring others.
However, people often come to psychotherapy with long histories of
anxiety, which can have profound effects on the brain. Working with rats
and vervet monkeys, Sapolsky and his colleagues demonstrated that
sustained stress results in hippocampal atrophy and a variety of
functional impairments (Sapolsky, 1990; Sapolsky, Uno, Rebert, & Finch,
1990). His research is

particularly important because it may help explain some of the negative
long-term effects of childhood trauma. The biological link between
prolonged stress and hippocampal atrophy appears to be mediated via the
catabolic influence of stress hormones. Glucocorticoids (GC) such as
cortisol are secreted by the adrenal gland to promote the breakdown of
complex compounds so that they can be used for immediate energy. The
first of these hormones was found to break down complex sugars, hence
the name gluco corticoids. It was later found that they also block
protein synthesis, inhibiting both new neural growth and the
construction of proteins involved in immunological functioning. Overall,
long-term learning and biological well-being are sacrificed for the sake
of immediate survival. This makes great sense when stressors are
short-lived. But when stress is chronic, high levels of cortisol put us
at risk of physical illness, learning dysfunctions, and memory deficits.
A number of roles of cortisol are seen in Table 13.1, along with its
impact on the brain and its relationship to a variety of illnesses. The
focus on immediate survival supersedes all long-term maintenance, akin
to burning the furniture to survive freezing in winter. Thus, these
biological processes need to be reversed as soon as possible after the
crisis has passed to allow the body to recover and return to functions
of restoration and repair. It is apparent that this system was designed
to cope with brief periods of stress in emergency situations; it was not
designed to be maintained for weeks or years at a time. The complexities
of cortical processing and anticipatory anxiety are poorly matched with
these primitive stress systems. Prolonged stress most affects two
processes. First, it inhibits protein production in order to maintain
higher levels of metabolism. Proteins are, of course, the building
blocks of the immunological system (leukocytes, Bcells, T-cells, natural
killer cells, etc.) and the suppression of protein synthesis also
suppresses our body's ability to fight off infection and illness. This
is one of the primary reasons for the high correlations found between
prolonged stress and disease. Second, sustained higher levels of
metabolism continue to pump sodium into neurons, eventually overwhelming
the cell's ability to transport it out again. This results in
destruction of the cell membrane and consequent cell death. This process
has been found to be particularly damaging to the hippocampus, resulting
in a variety of memory deficits and depression. Loss of volume in the
hippocampus is related to

cumulative GC exposure (Sapolsky et al., 1990). Sustained high levels of
stress partly explain why early negative experiences in parenting and
attachment have a lifelong impact on physical health, mental health, and
learning. TABLE 13.1 Stress and the Hippocampus The Role of Cortisol
Breaks down fats and proteins for immediate energy Inhibits inflammatory
processes Inhibits protein syntheses within the immune system
(leukocytes, B and Tcells, natural killer cells, etc.) Suppresses
gonadal hormones that support neural health, growth, and learning
Chronic High Levels of Cortisol/Glucocorticoids Result In Decreased
plasticity1 Dendritic degeneration2 Deficits of remyelination3 Cell
death4 Inhibition of neurogenesis and neural growth5 High Levels of
Cortisol Correlate With: Impaired declarative memory and spatial
reasoning6 Compromised Hippocampi Result In Deficits of new learning7
Short-and long-term memory8 Individuals With Smaller Hippocampi Include
Adult victims of early trauma9 Post-traumatic stress disorder10 Temporal
lobe epilepsy11 Schizophrenia12 Cushing's disease (hypercortisolism) 13

The hippocampus, rich in GC receptors, plays a negative feedback role
with the adrenal gland to inhibit GC production. If the hippocampus
detects too many GCs together, it sends a message (via the hypothalamus
or the pituitary) to the adrenal gland to slow down GC production
(Sapolsky, Krey, & McEwen, 1984). The more receptors we have, the
greater our feedback abilities to decrease cortisol production.
Prolonged high levels of GCs increase the vulnerability of the
hippocampus to a number of potential metabolic insults (Sapolsky, 1985;
Woolley, Gould, & McEwen, 1990). At this point it is unclear if
decreased volume reflects permanent damage to the hippocampus or a
reversible inhibition of the growth of new neurons. In either case, less
hippocampal mass means fewer GC receptors, which, in turn, means less
negative feedback to the adrenal gland. Loss of volume in the
hippocampus is related to cumulative GC exposure (Sapolsky et al.,
1990). Early trauma results in hippocampal impairment, which decreases
our ability to inhibit the emotions triggered by amygdaloid memory
systems. Further, deficits in reality testing and short-term memory will
make the process of integrating traumatic experiences into conscious
awareness more difficult. Longer periods of relationship building and
pragmatic interventions focused on stress reduction and the development
of coping skills may be necessary prerequisites for successful long-term
therapy with victims of early stress and trauma. The hippocampus is also
exquisitely sensitive to oxygen deprivation, so patients who have
suffered metabolic disruptions, head trauma, or seizures may have
hippocampal compromise, as well as mountain climbers, divers, or
individuals with heart disease (Lombroso & Sapolsky, 1998; Regard, Oelz,
Brugger, & Landis, 1989). High-dose cortisol administration for
autoimmune diseases may also result in hippocampal damage (Sapolsky,
1996). All of these factors should be kept in mind when taking histories
of patients with cognitive and neurological symptoms. Impairment of the
hippocampus from early chronic stress may make the therapeutic process
more difficult for many clients. For example, Stein and his colleagues
(Stein, Koverla, Hanna, Torchia, & McClarty, 1997) found that adult
women who had experienced childhood abuse had significantly reduced left
hippocampal volume. They also found that the amount of

reduction was significantly correlated with increased dissociative
symptoms. This relationship suggests that the left hippocampus may play
a role in integrating memories into a cohesive narrative. The
hippocampus is also thought to be involved in the flexible incorporation
of new information into existing structures of memory (Eichenbaum,
1992). If this is the case, early abuse may result in damage to neural
structures required to create new and more functional narratives. Rats
and humans differ in a number of ways besides whisker length. The
increased size of the human brain and its additional processing capacity
make it possible for us to worry about many more potential dangers, both
real and imagined. In addition, our brains allow us to create complex
situations such as traffic jams and overburdened schedules, generating
everincreasing levels of stress. Stressors such as these, which are
experienced as inescapable, tend to have a greater sustained cortisol
activation and negative impact on the brain. Although we like to think
of childhood as a time of innocence and play, many children grow up in a
state of constant distress. We saw this clearly in the attachment
research where adults with anxious attachment patterns demonstrated a
lack of recall for long periods of their childhoods. Parental physical
or mental illness, community violence, poverty, and many other factors
can contribute to this. Prolonged childhood stress can have lifelong
effects on functioning related to hippocampal damage, immunological
suppression, and other stress-related impairments. Learning Not to Fear
Courage is acting in spite of fear. ---Howard W. Hunter It is an
unfortunate twist of evolutionary fate that the amygdala is mature
before birth while the systems that inhibit it take years to develop.
This leaves us vulnerable to overwhelming fear with little to no ability
to protect ourselves. On the other hand, evolution has also provided us
with caretakers who allow us to link into their developed cortex until
our own is ready. The way they protect us from fear and modulate our
anxiety becomes a model upon which our own brain develops. Thus, we use
proximity to our parents as our key method of fear regulation, just as
cold-blooded animals use locomotion and change of location to regulate
their internal temperature.

Our attachment schemas come to reflect the success or failure of how we
and our parents navigate this process. We have seen from the research
with rats that maternal attention results in a brain that is better
equipped to learn as well as to downregulate the immediate and long-term
effects of stress. It turns out that in dealing with fear, the ability
to learn as well as having a more resilient stress system are both
important for facing life's challenges. The hippocampus is constantly
remodeled to keep abreast of current environmental changes. On the other
hand, the amygdala's role is to remember a threat, generalize it to
other possible threats, and carry it into the future. Because the
amygdala exhibits persistent dendritic modeling, we are unable to
completely forget painful and traumatic experiences (Rainnie et al.,
2004; Vyas, Bernal, & Chattorji, 2003; Vyas, & Chattorji, 2004 ). The
power of the amygdala and its stubbornness in the face of the
hippocampus leads us to be biased toward anxiety and fear. The
phenomenon of spontaneous recovery of a phobia demonstrates how the fear
we hoped was long gone was stored in our amygdala all along
(Vansteenwegen et al., 2005). Getting past our fears and phobias does
not entail forgetting to be afraid; rather, the extinction of fears
represents new learning organized by our slow systems of the cortex and
hippocampus. In other words, extinction learning represents the
formation of new neural associations that somehow keep the memory stored
in the amygdala from triggering the sympathetic nervous system (Milad &
Quirk, 2002; Rau & Fanselow, 2007). The ability of the prefrontal cortex
in modulating amygdala activity is believed to occur through the
development of descending inhibitory circuitry (Akirav & Maroun, 2007;
Ochsner et al., 2004). Evidence for this includes the fact that this
cortical-amygdala network exhibits a reciprocal activation pattern where
more cortical activation results in less amygdala activation and vice
versa. This may not only be why our problem-solving abilities can be
shorted out by fear, but also why thinking about and being prepared for
a situation lessens our fears. When we successfully use cognitive
techniques to decrease anxiety, we are likely building these descending
cortical networks to inhibit amygdala and autonomic activation (Schaefer
et al., 2002). Learning not to fear, just like secure attachment,
appears to be a major contribution of the ompfc (Morgan, Romanski, &
LeDoux, 1993; Phelps et al., 2004). Electrical stimulation of the
homologous region in the cortex of

rats results in both amygdala inhibition and a reduction of conditioned
fear (Milad, Vidal-Gonzalez, & Quirk, 2004; Perez-Jaranay & Vives, 1991;
Quirk, Likhtik, Pelletier, & Paré, 2003). Even the size of the ompfc in
humans is positively correlated with our ability to inhibit a fearful
response (Milad, Quinn, et al., 2005). Thus, it appears that top-down
control of the amygdala allows us to learn to discontinue a fearful
response to something that makes us afraid. In a study by Kim, those who
were taught to interpret a surprised face as negative had greater
amygdala activation while those who were guided to see it as positive
had more ompfc activation (Kim et al., 2003). These studies support the
notion that the ompfc modulates the activation of the amygdala based on
contextual and motivational factors (Kim et al., 2005; Myers & Davis,
2007; Ochsner et al., 2002; Phan et al., 2005). In other words, the slow
system regulates the fast system. These top-down circuits organize,
modulate, and direct attention in ways that shape experience and
reinforce the existing emotional state (Bishop, 2007; Christakou,
Robbins, & Everitt, 2004). Anxiety is associated with a reduced top-down
control of threat cues just as there is a reduction of control over
negative stimuli in depression (Bishop et al., 2004; Brewin & Smart,
2005). In other words, anxious people tend to find danger while
depressed people discover the negative aspects of their environments.
And while those of us with more attentional control will still have a
bias to orient toward the threat, we will exert more top-down control as
we become conscious of the stimulus (Derryberry & Reed, 2002). Once
again, the slow system modulates the fast system. Thus, the balance of
activation among the prefrontal cortex and amygdala also guides visual
attention based on relevance, emotion, and motivation (Gazzaley et al.,
2007; Geday, Kupers, & Gjedde, 2007). This is one of the many networks
that may become dysregulated in PTSD, resulting in disturbances of
sensory processing and memory, and even causing visual hallucinations
(Gilboa et al., 2004; Rauch, Shin, & Phelps, 2006). Dissociated PTSD
patients have greater activation in neural networks involved in the
representation of bodily states, suggesting a lack of adequate top-down
modulation of these networks by frontal executive systems (Lanius et
al., 2005). As one would expect, the severity of PTSD symptoms is
positively associated with amygdala activation and negatively correlated
with ompfc size and responsivity (Shin, Rauch, & Pitman, 2006; Williams
et al., 2006).

As we saw in Figure 13.2, the central nucleus of the amygdala is an
output region that projects to sites in the midbrain and hypothalamus
responsible for generating different aspects of the fear response. The
connections of the ompfc to the central nucleus of the amygdala are
particularly strong, especially to GABAergic (inhibitory) neurons called
intercalated cells (Freedman, Insel, & Smith, 2000; McDonald et al.,
1999; Royer, Martina, & Paré, 1999). It is now believed that it is
within the descending networks from the ompfc to the amygdala's central
nucleus that extinction learning is remembered and carries out its
inhibitory influences (Gottfried & Dolan, 2004; Quirk & Mueller, 2008).
Because learning in this neural circuit conforms to what is known about
the neurobiology of learning in general, the role of NMDA receptors,
protein synthesis, cortisol, and other factors that modulate learning
are likely involved in extinction learning (Elvander-Tottie et al.,
2006; Santini et al., 2004). Research shows that subjects involved in
the cognitive appraisal of fearful faces show both a decrease in
amygdala activation and an increase in prefrontal activation (Hariri et
al., 2000, 2003). This same amygdalaprefrontal activity shift occurs
during activation of a placebo effect (Wager et al., 2004) and recovery
following the presentation of negative emotional material (Jackson et
al., 2003). Individuals who manage to control their fear tend to have
more activation in right frontal regions than those who do not (Johanson
et al., 1998). A deficit of extinction learning could be an alternative
description of PTSD. Sufferers with PTSD show amygdala dysinhibition,
making them vulnerable to the hallmark symptoms of intrusion and arousal
(Akirav & Maroun, 2007). Patients with PTSD have also been shown to have
smaller subregions within their ompfc in regions where intercalated
cells are assumed to reside (Rauch et al., 2003). Also the thickness and
activity levels of these prefrontal regions in patients with PTSD during
extinction training correlates with their symptoms, supporting the
association between their symptoms and deficits of cortically based
extinction learning (Milad, Orr, et al., 2005; Phelps et al., 2004). The
Recovery of Fears and Phobias Under Stress Dangers bring fears, and
fears more dangers bring. ---Richard Baxter

Jacobs and Nadel (1985) proposed the existence of two systems of
learning and memory involved in fears and phobias. These two systems
predicted and parallel LeDoux's model of fast and slow fear circuitry.
The taxon system (fast system or amygdaloid system) is responsible for
the acquisition of skills and rules, and the conditioning of
stimulus-response connections. This system is context free, meaning that
it contains no information about the time or location in which the
learning took place. Taxon learning generalizes broadly and is primarily
nonconscious. This is the system in which early learning of fear,
safety, and attachment is organized and stored. The taxon system is
represented in what cognitive psychologists call implicit and procedural
memory. The locale system---with the hippocampus and the cortex at its
core---is responsible for cognitive maps necessary for external context,
mental representations, and the pairing of memories with the situations
in which they were learned. The development of the locale memory system
parallels that of hippocampal-cortical circuits. Thus, although there is
a great deal of learning during infancy (especially in the networks of
the fearful and social brains), there is no source attribution or
autobiographical narrative. For example, a mother's fearful look when
strangers approach may cause her child to develop a general wariness of
the world, but not recognize the source of this apprehension in similar
situations later in life. We enter middle childhood with neural networks
programmed by early learning, experienced as basic emotional givens. In
the absence of trauma, learning in adults involves a balanced
integration of taxon and locale systems that connect sensory, motor, and
emotional aspects of memory to its semantic and autobiographical
components. For children and traumatized adults, the taxon system may
function independently, resulting in an adaptive dissociation among
various systems of memory and conscious awareness. Jacobs and Nadel
contended that stress both changes the inner biological environment
activating the taxon system and suppresses the inhibitory effects of the
locale system. These changes result in the emergence of earlier fears or
frightening experiences that had been successfully inhibited. This
theory certainly parallels the voluminous research demonstrating the
contribution of stress to the emergence or worsening of psychiatric and
physical disorders. They suggested that stress impairs or downgrades the
functioning of the locale system, causing us to

fall back on the more primitive organization of taxon (amygdaloid)
systems. From a psychoanalytic perspective, this process may be
understood as regression to more primitive self states and defense
mechanisms. This process also parallels the return of neonatal reflexes
(the cortical release signs previously discussed in patients with
Alzheimer's disease or other forms of brain damage). Despite the
apparent extinction of a phobia or fear, the original memory is
maintained and can become reactivated under stress. This neural
explanation addresses the Freudian notion of symptom substitution, in
which one fear or source of anxiety may be replaced by another after
successful treatment of the first. In other words, a new trigger
reactivates the still intact underlying neural circuitry, another way of
saying what we covered earlier---that neurons within the amygdala
exhibit persistent dendritic modeling (Vyas et al., 2003). Because of
this, Jacobs and Nadel suggested that the therapist treating fears and
phobias may need to generate stress as a part of treatment to activate
and have access to these amygdala circuits. In addition, treatment may
need to be continued well after behavioral manifestations are
eliminated, as well as include stress management training. If the
overall level of stress can be decreased, the likelihood of reactivating
of primitive fear circuitry decreases. Successful psychotherapy for
anxiety, fears, and phobias has been shaped by the necessity of
integrating fast and slow circuits, taxon and locale systems, and affect
and cognition. Educating patients about panic leads to increased
participation of the cortex during anxiety states. Cognitive therapy is
all about utilizing the slow locale systems to inhibit and modulate fast
taxon systems that have been shaped in maladaptive ways. Stress
inoculation, or cognitive preparation for future stress, leads to an
increasing opportunity for descending inhibition of the amygdaloid
circuits by the hippocampal-cortical networks. Exposure, response
prevention, and relaxation training result in the counterconditioning of
unconscious associations stored in amygdaloid memory systems. This model
of memory applies to all clinical situations, regardless of the presence
of panic or anxiety disorders. Drowning in a Sea of Doom There is no
greater hell than to be a prisoner of fear.

---Ben Johnson Tina's cardiologist suggested that she see a
psychotherapist after a third visit to the emergency room. Each time,
seemingly out of nowhere, Tina would become breathless and lightheaded;
her heart would race until she felt as if it were going to burst from
her chest. Convinced she was having a heart attack, Tina would call the
paramedics. As she waited for the ambulance, Tina reported feeling like
she was drowning in a "sea of doom." She would imagine her teenaged
children growing up without her, and vividly recollect her own mother's
death when she was a child. These feelings and images, together with the
fear of death, would make her even more frightened. She told me that
waiting for the ambulance felt like "an eternity." Tina, who was
actually in excellent health, was repeatedly told she was having panic
attacks. It took three of these embarrassing episodes to convince her to
seek therapy. She came to my office feeling defeated and very
frightened, as if she was losing a lifelong battle to stay in control.
During our first session, I learned that Tina had a difficult childhood,
including abandonment by her father, prolonged financial difficulties,
and the death of her mother when she was 15. Tina finished high school
while living with an aunt, put herself through college, and became a
successful real estate agent. A 4-year marriage had left her with two
children, now in their teens, to raise on her own. Tina's identity was
that of a survivor and hard worker who did not allow herself to depend
on others. The panic attacks had shaken her self-confidence and created
a fear of returning to the chaos, pain, and dependency of her childhood.
She had hoped for a medical explanation to avoid revisiting her past. I
began treatment by educating Tina about her body's fear response and why
it felt to her like she was having a heart attack. Her racing heart,
lightheadedness, rapid breathing, and sense of danger were the result of
the amygdala's multiple signals to prepare to fight or run. Gaining
conscious regulation of her amygdala's alarm circuitry was the first
order of business. We discussed strategies to ward off these attacks by
slowing her breathing and employing relaxation techniques. During
sessions, I would have Tina make herself anxious, and then assist her in
calming down. This provided her with a sense of mastery in regulating
amygdala activation.

Understanding what was happening in her body and knowing that her life
was not in danger relieved some of her fear. The second phase of
treatment focused on addressing the long-standing lifestyle issues that
kept her in a chronic state of stress. We examined the heavy burden of
responsibilities she carried and her lack of relaxation and recreation.
Tina's financial fears led her to overbook her work schedule to the
point of exhaustion. I learned that Tina constantly criss-crossed the
Los Angeles freeway system, traveling between 30,000 and 40,000 miles
each year. Between showing homes and shuttling her children from school
to their various activities, we calculated that she was fighting traffic
up to 6 hours a day, usually behind schedule. She began to understand
the panic attacks as her body's way of telling her to make some changes
to reduce her level of stress. Regular exercise, decreasing her sales
territory, and making alternative arrangements for some of her
children's transportation proved to be the most helpful solutions in
these areas. As these interventions became more routine, we explored the
impact of her childhood experiences on both her self-image and
lifestyle. Tina harbored the fear that she would die like her mother,
leaving her children alone in the world. She tried to do everything she
could for them, and save all the money they would need to go to college,
all the time thinking that she would not be around much longer. Her
financial planning was detailed and over the years she had followed
through with it almost to the letter. The problem was that it had
originally been created for two incomes; now she was doing it on her
own. She came to see that her fear of death might become a
self-fulfilling prophecy. Tina also came to realize that her heart was
still broken over her mother's death, and that she had never allowed
herself to grieve her loss, a luxury she had felt she could not afford.
Opening herself to these feelings of loss was the beginning of her
therapy. Summary The fearful brain has two interconnected systems
responsible for different aspects of fear processing. The fast or taxon
system---with the amygdala at its core---makes rapid, reflexive, and
unconscious decisions to provide for immediate survival. This system
develops first and organizes learning related to attachment and affect
regulation. It involves sensory, motor, and affective memories typical
of early life and later traumatic memories. The

slow or locale system, based in hippocampal-cortical networks,
contextualizes and makes conscious what is being processed. The slow
system's job is to regulate the activity of the amygdala by modulating
its output based on a more complex appraisal of potentially dangerous
situations. This system contextualizes experience in time and space, and
supports conscious awareness via cortical connectivity. These two
systems, reflecting both top-down and left-right circuits, can become
dissociated during prolonged periods of stress or trauma. In
psychotherapy, we attempt to activate both fast and slow circuits, taxon
and locale systems, and implicit and explicit forms of memory to inform
and educate each about the other. When emotional taxon networks are
inhibited, we use techniques to trigger them so that they can be
activated and integrated with slow locale circuits. When these same
networks are out of control, we recruit locale circuits to contextualize
them in time and space and allow them to be tamed by the descending,
inhibitory capabilities of cortical processes. The overall goal is the
activation and integration of both systems. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 14

Trauma and Neural Network Dissociation The beauty of the world has two
edges, one of laughter, one of anguish, cutting the heart asunder.
---Virginia Woolf For each of us there is a point at which fear crosses
the line into trauma, causing severe disturbances in the integration of
cognitive, sensory, and emotional processing. The psychological and
neurobiological reactions to traumatic experiences lie on a continuum of
severity. As a general rule, the earlier, more severe, and more
prolonged the trauma, the more negative and far reaching its effects (De
Bellis, Baum, et al., 1999; De Bellis, Keshavan, et al., 1999).
Unresolved trauma may result in symptoms of post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD), which reflect the physiological dysregulation and
dissociation of multiple neural networks. The Symptoms of Post-traumatic
Stress Disorder The best way out is always through. ---Robert Frost
Traumatic experiences result in a variety of well-understood
physiological and psychological reactions to threat, which cause a
number of predictable symptoms to emerge. These symptoms tend to
gradually diminish after the resolution of the traumatic situation, as
we gather support from others, and repeatedly talk through the
experience. These conditions allow us to regain both neurobiological
homeostasis and a sense of emotional control. Talking through the trauma
with supportive others creates the neurobiological conditions for the
reestablishment of neural coherence. Put

another way, constructing narratives in an emotionally supportive
environment supports the psychological and neurobiological integration
required to avoid dissociative reactions. Narratives drive the
integration of cognition, affect, sensation, and behaviors, which can
remain dissociated especially when early trauma, such as child sexual
abuse, is never allowed to be discussed. The suffering of Holocaust
survivors and combat veterans is often exacerbated by the political and
social dynamics that encourage them to remain silent about their
horrifying experiences. When trauma is severe or chronic the victim can
develop PTSD. PTSD is caused by the loss of the regulation of the
neurobiological processes responsible for appraising and responding to
threat. When this system becomes dysregulated, the body reacts as if the
past trauma is continuing to occur. The three main symptom clusters of
PTSD---hyperarousal, intrusion, and avoidance---reflect the loss of
integration among neural networks controlling cognition, sensation,
affect, and behavior. Hyperarousal reflects a stress-induced
dysregulation of the amygdala and autonomic nervous system, resulting in
an exaggerated startle reflex, agitation, anxiety, and irritability.
That jumpy feeling we get when we drink too much caffeine gives us a
taste of this experience. Chronic hyperarousal leads one to experience
the world as a more dangerous and hostile place. Constant agitation and
wariness make us less desirable companions and can cut us off from the
healthful effects of relationships. Intrusions occur when traumatic
experiences break into conscious awareness and are experienced as if
they are happening in the present. There is no sense of distance from
the trauma in time or place, because the corticohippocampal networks
have not been able to contextualize the somatic, sensory, and emotional
memories within networks of autobiographical memory. Intrusions may
manifest as flashbacks, resulting in a veteran hitting the ground in
response to a car backfiring, or a rape victim having a panic attack
while making love to her husband. These are activations of subcortical
systems cued by stimuli reminiscent of the trauma. You may remember from
the chapters on memory and fear that the amygdala both controls this
activation and tends to generalize from the initial stimuli to a wide
variety of cues. Avoidance is the attempt to defend against dangers by
limiting contact with the world, withdrawing from others, and narrowing
the range of thoughts and feelings. Avoidance can take the form of
denial and

repression, and, in more extreme instances, dissociation and amnesia.
The power of avoidance was highlighted by the research of Williams
(1994), who found that 38% of adult women who had suffered documented
sexual abuse as children had no memory of the event. Compulsive
activities can also aid in avoiding negative affect, as can alcohol and
drug abuse, both so common in victims of trauma. Avoidance enables
short-term anxiety reduction while maintaining the lack of neural
network integration which perpetuates the illness. When experienced in
combination, these symptoms result in a cycle of activation and numbing,
reflecting the body's memory for, and continued victimization by, the
trauma (van der Kolk, 1994). Instead of serving to mobilize the body to
deal with new external threats, traumatic memories trigger continuing
frightening emotional responses. Someone suffering from PTSD is in a
continual loop of unconscious self-traumatization, coping, and
exhaustion. When these symptoms are experienced on a chronic basis, they
can devastate every aspect of the victim's life, from physical
well-being to the quality of relationships to the victim's experience of
the world. We have all heard the sayings "What doesn't kill you makes
you stronger" and "Time heals all wounds." These bits of common wisdom
conjure up pictures of difficult and traumatic experiences that, once
overcome, result in greater levels of physical and emotional well-being.
Although trials and tribulations can certainly be important learning
experiences, they can also create permanent biological, neurological,
and psychological compromise. Trauma produces widespread homeostatic
dysregulations that interfere with all realms of personal and
interpersonal functioning (Perry et al., 1995). Support for the negative
impact of trauma comes from research showing that cumulative lifetime
trauma increases the likelihood of developing PTSD (Yehuda et al.,
1995). A history of previous assaults increases the chances of
developing PTSD following rape (Resnick, Yehuda, Pitman, & Foy, 1995).
Likewise, childhood abuse victims are more likely to develop PTSD after
adult combat exposure (Bremner, Southwick, et al., 1993). It has also
been found that severe stress reactions during combat make subsequent
negative reactions to mild and moderate stress more probable (Solomon,
1990).

The Neurochemistry of PTSD Gulf War Syndrome is not one cause, not one
illness. It is many causes, many illnesses. ---Christopher Shays States
of acute stress result in predictable patterns of biochemical changes
including increases in norepinephrine, dopamine, endorphins, and
glucocorticoids, and a decrease in serotonin. These changes are part of
the body's mobilization to confront threat. When stress is prolonged or
becomes chronic, changes continue to occur in the baseline production,
availability, and homeostatic regulation of these neurochemicals,
resulting in long-term behavioral and psychological alterations. Each of
these substances has its own role in the stress response and contributes
in different ways to the long-term impact of PTSD. As we have seen,
increased levels of norepinephrine (NE) prepare us for fight-or-flight
readiness and reinforce the biological encoding of traumatic memory.
Higher long-term levels of NE result in an increase in arousal, anxiety,
irritability, and a heightened or unmodulated startle response (Butler
et al., 1990; Ornitz & Pynoos, 1989). Besides being stronger, the
startle response is also more resistant to habituation in response to
subsequent milder and novel stressors (Nisenbaum, Zigmond, Sved, &
Abercrombie, 1991; Petty, Chae, Kramer, Jordan, & Wilson, 1994; van der
Kolk, 1994). Being consistently startled increases the victim's
experience of the world as an unsettling and dangerous place, a good
example of a feedback loop between physiological and psychological
processes. In fact, drugs that block the impact of NE are being used
experimentally to determine if they may help victims of PTSD decrease
their physiological response to reminders of their trauma (Brunet et
al., 2008). High levels of dopamine correlate with hypervigilance,
paranoia, and perceptual distortions when under stress. Symptoms of
social withdrawal and the avoidance of new and unfamiliar situations
(neophobia) are shaped by these biochemical changes. Lower levels of
serotonin have been found in traumatized humans and animals after being
subjected to inescapable shock (Anisman, Zaharia, Meaney, & Merali,
1998; Usdin, Kvetnansky, & Kopin, 1976). Chronically low levels of
serotonin are correlated with higher

levels of irritability, depression, suicide, arousal, and violence
(Canli & Lesch, 2007; Coccaro, Siever, Klar, & Maurer, 1989). Elevated
levels of endogenous opioids, which serve as analgesics to relieve pain
in fight-or-flight situations, can have a profoundly negative impact on
cognition, memory, and reality testing. Higher opioid levels also
support emotional blunting, dissociation, depersonalization, and
derealization, all of which provide a sense of distance from the
traumatized body (Shilony & Grossman, 1993). However, when they become
harmfully used as defenses, they disrupt our ability to stay engaged in
day-to-day life. As we have seen, high levels of glucocorticoids have a
catabolic effect on the nervous system and are thought to be responsible
for decreased hippocampal volume and related memory deficits (Bremner,
Scott, et al., 1993; Nelson & Carver, 1998; Watanabe, Gould, & McEwen,
1992). The hippocampi of patients with PTSD related to childhood
physical and sexual abuse have been shown to be 12% smaller than those
of comparison subjects (Bremner et al., 1997). Another study showed that
right hippocampi were 8% smaller in patients with combat-related PTSD
(Bremner et al., 1995). Glucocorticoids sacrifice long-term conservation
and homeostasis for short-term survival. Chronically high levels have
negative effects on brain structures and the immune system, resulting in
higher rates of learning disabilities and physical illness, which
enhances victims' experience of being fragile and vulnerable
individuals. These biochemical and neuroanatomical changes are
paralleled by such symptomatology as emotional dyscontrol, social
withdrawal, and lower levels of adaptive functioning. Together, these
and other negative effects of trauma result in compromised functioning
in many areas of life. The impact of trauma depends on a complex
interaction of the physical and psychological stages of development
during which it occurs, the length and degree of the trauma, and the
presence of vulnerabilities or past traumas. The impact of chronic
trauma becomes woven into the structure of personality and is hidden
behind other symptoms, making it difficult to identify, diagnose, and
treat. Expanding the Definition of Trauma To the child...traumas are not
experienced as events in life, but as life defining.

---Christopher Bollas Trauma is not limited to surviving
life-threatening experiences, as the standard diagnostic manual appears
to suggest (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). For a young child,
trauma may be experienced in the form of separation from parents,
looking into the eyes of a depressed mother, or living in a highly
stressful household (Cogill, Caplan, Alexandra, Robson, & Kumar, 1986).
For an adolescent, trauma may come in the form of incessant teasing by
peers or caring for an alcoholic parent. For an adult, chronic
loneliness or the loss of a pet may be traumatic. There is increasing
evidence that stress is possible even before birth; an unborn child may
become stressed as a result of the shared biological environment with
its mother. Studies suggest that maternal stress is associated with
lower birth weight, increased irritability, hyperactivity, and learning
disabilities in children (Gunnar, 1992, 1998; Zuckerman, Bauchner,
Parker, & Cabral, 1990). Rats born to stressed mothers show more
clinging to the mother and decreased locomotion and environmental
exploration (Schneider, 1992). Prenatal stress may also result in
permanent alterations in dopamine activity and cerebral lateralization,
making offspring more susceptible to anxiety and impairing their
functioning as adults (Field et al., 1988). Children of Holocaust
survivors have an increased prevalence of PTSD despite similar rates of
exposure to traumatic events as children of non-Holocaust survivors.
This suggests that they experienced a transferred vulnerability through
interactions with their traumatized parents (Yehuda, 1999). Maternal
depression may serve as a highly stressful or traumatic experience for
infants and children. Tiffany Field and her colleagues found that
infants of depressed mothers show neurophysiological and behavioral
signs of depression and stress, including greater right frontal lobe
activation, higher levels of NE, lower vagal tone, and higher heart
rates and cortisol levels (Field & Diego, 2008b; Field, Diego, &
Hernandez-Reif, 2006). Just like their depressed mothers, these infants
engage in less interactive behaviors (e.g., orienting toward and gazing
at others) vital for healthy development. Infants of depressed mothers
behave in this way even with other adults, making it difficult for them
to successfully interact with nondepressed others (Field et al., 1988).

In another study, it was found that depressed mothers were angry at
their infants more often, disengaged from them more often, were more
likely to poke them, and spent less time in matching emotional states
(Field, Healy, Goldstein, & Guthertz, 1990). These results suggest that
infants are modeling their mother's behavior, resonating with their
depressed moods, and reacting to the negative behaviors directed toward
them. Although we would not consider these infants traumatized in the
traditional sense, the loss of maternal presence, engagement, and
vitality may all be experienced as life threatening. Fortunately, it has
been shown that interventions with depressed mothers and their infants
have positive results. For example, remission of maternal depression and
teaching mothers to massage their infants on a regular basis improves
the infants' symptoms and the mothers' mood (Field, 1997). The effects
of early and severe trauma are extremely widespread, devastating, and
difficult to treat. Because of the importance of a context of safety and
bonding in the early construction of the brain, childhood trauma
compromises core neural networks. It stands to reason that the most
devastating types of trauma are those that occur at the hands of
caretakers. Physical and sexual abuse by parents not only traumatizes
children, but also deprives them of healing interactions and a safe
haven. The wide range of effects involved in the adaptation to early
unresolved trauma results in complex post-traumatic stress disorder.
Complex Post-traumatic Stress Disorder The other day I heard someone
knocking on my window. I'd rather be dead than hear that. ---A
10-year-old kidnapping victim Complex PTSD occurs in the context of
early, prolonged, and inescapable trauma. It is called complex because
of its extensive effects on all areas of physiology, development, and
functioning (Herman, 1992; Navalta et al., 2004). The enduring
personality traits and coping strategies that emerge in these situations
tend to decrease positive adaptation and increase an individual's
vulnerability to future trauma. This can manifest through engagement in
abusive relationships, poor judgment, or a lack of adequate
self-protection. Long-term PTSD has been shown to correlate with the

presence of neurological soft signs, which suggest subtle neurological
impairments (Gurvits et al., 2000), and may reflect a vulnerability to,
or the impact of, the effects of trauma (Green, 1981). For an adult
under normal circumstances, a threat triggers a fight-orflight response.
The threat is dealt with and the flight-fight response soon subsides.
Children are not well equipped to cope with threat in this way. Fighting
and fleeing may actually be maladaptive because their survival depends
on relying on those around them. When a child experiences trauma
inflicted by a caretaker, or cries for help but no help arrives, he or
she may shift from fear and hyperarousal to psychological and
neurological dissociation (Perry et al., 1995). This may also be true
for those women who are unable to outrun or outfight male attackers. The
symptoms of agitation shown by traumatized children are often
misdiagnosed as attention deficit disorder, while the numbing response
in infants can be misinterpreted as a lack of awareness or sensitivity
to pain. Until recently, surgery was performed on infants without
anesthesia because their gradual lack of protest was mistakenly
interpreted as an insensitivity to pain rather than lapsing into a state
of shock (Zeltzer, Anderson, & Schecter, 1990). Survey research suggests
that less than 25% of physicians performing circumcision on newborns use
any form of analgesia (Wellington & Rieder, 1993), despite physiological
indications that neonates are experiencing stress and pain during and
after the procedure (Hoyle et al., 1983). These practices appear to be a
holdover of beliefs that newborns either don't experience or don't
remember pain (Marshall, Stratton, Moore, & Boxerman, 1980). Thus, our
lack of appreciation for the possibility for traumatic reactions in
neonates and children likely leads us to miss many PTSD reactions in the
young. Research with rats has demonstrated that exposure to inescapable
shock sensitizes their hippocampi to subsequent releases of NE under
stress (Petty et al., 1994). This suggests that prolonged stress and
trauma may cause us to react more strongly to subsequent milder stress.
This may help to explain the coping difficulties seen in victims of PTSD
when confronted with mild to moderate stress (Petty et al., 1994). Think
back to Sheldon, who still suffered from anxiety 60 years after his
childhood experiences during World War II. Dissociation allows the
traumatized individual to escape the trauma via a number of biological
and psychological processes. Increased levels of

endogenous opioids create a sense of well-being and a decrease in
explicit processing of overwhelming traumatic situations. Derealization
and depersonalization reactions allow the victim to avoid the reality of
his or her situation, or watch it as a detached observer. These
processes can create an experience of leaving the body, traveling to
other worlds, or immersing oneself into other objects in the
environment. Many victims of violence and sexual abuse report watching
themselves being attacked from a distance. Hyperarousal and dissociation
in childhood create an inner biopsychological environment primed to
establish boundaries between different emotional states and experiences.
If it is too painful to experience the world from inside one's body,
even one's self-identity can become organized outside the physical self.
Early traumatic experiences organize neuroanatomical networking, thus
impacting experience and adaptation throughout development. The tendency
to dissociate and disconnect various tracks of processing creates a bias
toward unintegrated information processing across conscious awareness,
sensation, affect, and behavior. General dissociative defenses resulting
in an aberrant organization of networks of memory, fear, and the social
brain contribute to deficits of affect regulation, attachment, and
executive functioning (van der Kolk et al., 1996). The malformation of
these interdependent systems results in many disorders that spring from
extreme early stress. Compulsive disorders related to eating or
gambling, somatization disorders in which emotions are converted into
physical symptoms, and borderline personality disorder all reflect
complex adaptations to early trauma (Saxe et al., 1994; van der Kolk et
al., 1996). I Am Not Crazy! Demoralize the enemy from within by
surprise, terror, sabotage, assassination. ---Adolf Hitler Jesse was
referred to me by her neurologist after months of extensive medical and
neurodiagnostic testing. Her team of doctors could find no physical
cause for the debilitating pain she experienced in her head and upper
body. She had tried alternative forms of treatment, such as
chiropractics and acupuncture, without much relief. Jesse came to see me
at

the insistence of her husband, and she was not the least bit happy about
it. She sat down with her arms crossed and her jaw set, glared at me,
and said, "I am not crazy!" For many years, life had been going well for
Jesse. She had a solid marriage and a happy and healthy 4-year-old
daughter. She found her work as an executive in a small information
technology firm interesting. She liked her colleagues, and was a valued
member of the team. About a year before, she had started experiencing
pain in her head, hands, and back and began a fruitless search for a
cure. The pain became the center of her attention as her interest and
ability in being an executive, friend, wife, and mother gradually
diminished. By the time she came for therapy, she was spending most of
her days taking medication, sneaking away for naps, and withdrawing to
her room whenever she could find an excuse. There was no longer any fun
or relaxation in her life, and her husband had become seriously
concerned. Given her resistance to therapy and fear of being seen as
crazy, developing a therapeutic relationship with Jesse was slow going.
She reluctantly began to share about her very troubled childhood. Jesse
felt she had obviously overcome her traumatic past based on her later
success at work and in her marriage. Unfortunately, a common occurrence
in her childhood was to be locked in her room by her father as a prelude
to him beating her mother. She would lie in bed, frozen by both of their
screams, her mother's cries for her, and the long ominous silences that
followed. As she told me of her mother's physical abuse at the hands of
her father, she remained confident that there was no connection between
her present physical pain and the emotional pain of her youth. Jesse
would eventually begin to pound on the door and yell for her mother. As
she grew older, however, she gave up her outward protests and instead
lay in bed crying and clutching her face and head. This clutching
eventually turned to self-abuse, which included driving her nails into
her head and shoulders, drawing blood, and eventually scarring herself.
She showed me some of her scars with a combination of shame and pride.
As she described these experiences, I began to suspect that her pain
symptoms might well be implicit somatic memories of her traumatic past.
The stresses in her present life, including the fact that her own
daughter was reaching the age she had been when she first became aware
of the beatings, could all serve as triggers for these memories. From a
psychological perspective, her

physiological suffering could be seen as a form of loyalty and continued
connection to her mother. I decided not to share these interpretations
because of Jesse's resistance to the possible psychological origins of
her pain. Instead, I continued to encourage her to talk about her
childhood in as much detail as she could tolerate. She went on to tell
me about her teenage years, when she nursed her mother through the final
months of a prolonged battle with cancer. Throughout my work with Jesse,
I avoided any talk of her physical pain and continued to refocus her on
sharing childhood experiences with me. In the process of repeatedly
sharing stories from her childhood, her memories became increasingly
detailed. Her emotions too, became more available, and better matched to
the situations she described. Jesse expressed her rage at her father for
his violent behavior, and realized that she was also angry at her mother
for not leaving him when Jesse was young. As she worked through these
memories and put them into the perspective of her current life, Jesse
gradually came to an understanding that instead of remaining loyal to
her mother through physical suffering, she could identify with her by
being a good parent to her own daughter. As therapy progressed, we both
came to notice that the intensity of her pain and the time she spent
focusing on it gradually diminished. Without making a direct
interpretation, the connections in Jesse's brain between her physical
and emotional pain were forged. Toward the end of our last session, she
thanked me for helping her, although she didn't understand how it
happened. Jesse winked at me and said, "You are a tricky fellow."
Traumatic Memory Memories are nothing but the lash with which yesterday
flogs tomorrow. ---Philip Moeller It has long been recognized that high
levels of stress impair learning of new information (Yerkes & Dodson,
1908). This is because the biochemical and hormonal changes triggered by
stress impair protein synthesis and other neuroplastic processes
required for memory encoding. Trauma can also impair integration across
the domains of memory, and is capable of

dissociating the usually integrated tracks of sensation, emotion,
behavior, and conscious awareness. When NE is administered to rats after
an aversive event, low doses enhance memory retention whereas high doses
impair it (Introini-Collison & McGaugh, 1987); this supports Yerkes and
Dodson's theory that moderate levels of arousal enhance memory whereas
high levels impair it. In a study by Cahill and his colleagues (Cahill,
Prins, Weber, & McGaugh, 1994), subjects were read emotionally evocative
and neutral stories and shown related slides. Half of the subjects were
given propranolol (a drug that decreases the effects of NE), and the
others were not. Results demonstrated that subjects who received
propranolol had significantly impaired memory for emotion-arousing but
not for neutral stories. Activation of the amygdala and related
physiological and biological changes are at the heart of modulating
traumatic memory (Cahill & McGaugh, 1998). The release of norepinephrine
during the stress response serves to heighten the activation of the
amygdala, thus reinforcing and intensifying traumatic memories (McGaugh,
1990). Individuals with PTSD have had their amygdaloid memory systems
imprinted with trauma at such an extreme level that their memories are
resistant to cortical integration (van der Kolk et al., 1996). This
results in decreased attention to and processing of external stimuli,
giving the traumatic memories more power (Lanius et al., 2001). When we
think of trauma overwhelming the defenses, we can also think in terms of
an intense activation of subcortical networks serving to inhibit the
participation of the hippocampus and cortex in the memory process.
Traumatic experience can disrupt the storage (encoding) of information
and the integration of the various systems of attention and memory
(Vasterling, Brailey, Constans, & Sutker, 1998; Yehuda et al., 1995;
Zeitlin & McNally, 1991). Memory encoding for conscious explicit memory
can be disrupted when the hippocampus is blocked or damaged by
glucocorticoids, or is inhibited by heightened amygdala activation. This
could lead to a lack of conscious memory for traumatic and highly
emotional events (Adamec, 1991; Schacter, 1986; Squire & Zola-Morgan,
1991). Memory integration can be impaired by disruption of the
corticohippocampal tracks dedicated to the integration of new memories
into existing memory networks. Remember that these systems also provide
contextualization in time and

space, and integration of sensory, affective, and behavioral memory with
conscious awareness. Thus, although we may have very accurate
physiological and emotional memories for a traumatic event, the factual
information may be quite inaccurate given the inhibition of
corticohippocampal involvement during the trauma. Add to this the
tendency of the left hemisphere interpreter to confabulate a story in
the absence of accurate information, and we may have what represents the
underlying mechanisms responsible for what has unfortunately been
referred to as false memory syndrome (PazAlonzo & Goodman, 2008).
Traumatic Flashbacks and Speechless Terror Memories are contrary things;
if you quit chasing them and turn your back, they often return on their
own. ---Stephen King Flashbacks are frightening experiences commonly
reported by traumatized individuals. They are described as full-body
experiences of traumatic events, which include the physiological
arousal, sensory stimulation, and emotional impact of the traumatic
experience. In a sense, the victim of a flashback is transported back to
the event, and as far as the brain is concerned, it is happening again.
Flashbacks are so intense that they overwhelm the reality constraints of
the present situation and send the victim into an all-too-familiar
nightmare. The power of traumatic flashbacks was driven home for me one
day in a therapy session with a professional football player who was
nearly twice my size. When recalling his early abuse, he began to cry
softly as he spoke of one particularly painful experience from
childhood. He described in agonizing detail his small body growing limp
after repeated blows from his father's fists. Suddenly, he was standing
over me, breathing heavily, his arms down at his sides. Despite my
alarm, I managed to calmly ask him what he was feeling. While looking
into my eyes he said in a child's voice, " Please don't hurt me
anymore." His fear of me despite the difference in our sizes was a stark
demonstration of the all-encompassing nature of flashbacks and their
ability to override contemporary reality.

Traumatic flashbacks are memories of a different nature than are those
of nontraumatic events. To begin with, they are stored in more primitive
circuits with less cortical and left hemisphere involvement. Because of
this, they are strongly somatic, sensory, and emotional, as well as
inherently nonverbal (Krystal, Bremner, Southwick, & Charney, 1998). The
lack of corticohippocampal involvement results in an absence of the
localization of the memory in time, so that when it is triggered, it is
experienced as occurring in the present. Flashbacks are also repetitive
and stereotypic, often seeming to proceed at the pace at which the
events originally occurred. This suggests that although the cortex may
condense and abbreviate memories in narrative and symbolic form, these
subcortical networks may store memories in more concrete,
stimulus-response chains of sensations, behaviors, and emotions. In a
sense they become procedural memories, similar to learning to play a
piece of music note by note or a complex dance routine step by step. In
flashbacks, the amygdala-mediated fear networks biased toward the right
hemisphere and subcortical systems become dominant. The amygdala's dense
connectivity with the visual system most likely accounts for the
presence of visual hallucinations as part of flashbacks. Bereaved
individuals often report seeing their loved ones sitting in their
favorite chair or walking across the room in a familiar way. Those who
have been attacked will sometimes think they see their attacker out of
the corner of their eye. This is in contrast to the hallucinations in
schizophrenia that involve the temporal lobes and are usually auditory
in nature. Rauch and colleagues (1996) took eight patients suffering
from PTSD and exposed them to two audiotapes: One was emotionally
neutral and the other was a script of a traumatic experience. While they
were listening to these tapes, patients' heart rates and regional
cerebral blood flow (RCBF) were measured via PET scans. RCBF was greater
during traumatic audiotapes in right-sided structures including the
amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex, insular, anterior, and medial temporal
lobe, and the anterior cingulate cortex. These are the areas thought to
be involved with intense emotion. An extremely interesting and
potentially important clinical finding was a decrease in RCBF in and
around Broca's area (an area of the left inferior frontal cortex that
controls speech). These findings suggest an active inhibition of
language centers during trauma. Based on these results,

speechless terror---often reported by victims of trauma---may have
neurobiological correlates consistent with what we know about brain
architecture and brain--behavior relationships. This inhibitory effect
on Broca's area may impair the encoding of conscious semantic memory for
traumatic events. It will then naturally interfere with the development
of narratives that serve to process the experience and lead to neural
network integration and psychological healing. Activating Broca's area
and related left cortical networks of explicit memory may be essential
in psychotherapy with patients suffering from PTSD and other
anxiety-based disorders. Activating Broca's Area During a Flashback Hope
will never be silent. ---Harvey Milk Jan, seeing me for a one-time
consultation, reported that she had suffered severe physical and sexual
abuse throughout her early childhood and into her late teens. She told
me over the phone that her flashbacks were increasing in frequency to
three or four a day. Although her therapist had encouraged her to
experience them and express her emotions as much as possible, Jan felt
like she was getting worse instead of better. Expressing her feelings
seemed to only trigger more frequent and intense flashbacks. She
reported becoming less and less functional, which made her decide that
she needed a different approach to therapy. Jan arrived at my office
with a stack of diaries and The Wall Street Journal under her arm. It
was hard to believe that this was the same person I had spoken to over
the phone. My first thought was that dissociation is an amazing defense.
Jan was a well-dressed woman in her mid-40s who was obviously bright and
had a good deal of self-insight. The childhood experiences she recounted
in my office were horrendous, and I marveled at her very survival. Her
intelligence and sheer will to live were remarkable. It seemed obvious,
however, that her repeated reexperiencing of these memories was not
helping. The nature of these memories was not changing over time, nor
were the emotions evoked by her memories diminishing. In this case, each
flashback seemed to retraumatize her anew. She began by talking about
her work, and then described the psychotherapy and other forms of
treatment in which she had engaged.

Approximately 10 minutes into the session, as she was discussing the
family members who had abused her, she began to have a flashback. Jan
reported pain in various parts of her body and contorted as if what she
was describing was happening to her at that very moment. She began to
gag as the memory of the sexual abuse from decades earlier was evoked.
She was reexperiencing these painful episodes not only visually in her
mind, but as somatic memories throughout her body. As she curled into a
fetal position on the couch and gasped for breath, my mind raced trying
to think of a way to help. Remembering the research done by Rauch and
his colleagues, I decided to try to activate Broca's area. I began
speaking to Jan in a firm but gentle voice, loud enough to reach her in
the midst of her traumatic reenactment but not so loud as to frighten
her and add to her trauma. I wondered if it mattered which ear I spoke
into, and which ear has a more direct connection to the left hemisphere
language centers. I moved closer to her (careful not to get too close)
and repeated over and over, "This is a memory, it isn't happening now.
You are remembering something that happened to you many years ago. It
was a terrible experience but it is over. It is a memory. It is not
happening now." As I repeated these and similar statements, I was
concerned that Jan would be unable to breathe or that my presence might
cause her more fear. The words of one of my supervisors flashed through
my mind: " Whatever you do, don't panic." I was also encouraged by the
fact that she had survived this many times. After 10 minutes (which
seemed to me like 10 hours), she calmed down and returned to the
present. Jan reported that she heard me speaking as if I were far away,
but focused on my voice and words as best she could. It was as if I were
there in the past with her, calling to her from a safe future where she
would be away from all these people who hurt her. At the end of the
session she thanked me and left; I didn't hear from her for a number of
months. When she called one afternoon, she reported that since her visit
with me, the nature of these flashbacks had changed. She said she had
wanted to wait before she called me because she didn't expect that the
change would last. Given her many years in a variety of unhelpful
treatments, it was easy to be sympathetic to her negative expectations.
Jan described that since our session, the flashbacks were less
physically intense and less frequent. On a few occasions she had even
been able to stop one

that was coming on by thinking of my words during the session: "This is
just a memory. You are safe now. No one can hurt you." Perhaps most
interesting was that she was now able to remember during her flashbacks
that she was not a child, that she was not to blame, and it was those
who were hurting her who were bad. Although her other therapists had
told her this in the past, only recently could she process these
thoughts during her flashbacks. I told her that I felt these were signs
that the experiences were beginning to be connected to her conscious
adult self, and that now she was able to fight and care for herself even
in the face of her past. I encouraged her to keep talking throughout the
flashback experiences and bring with her as much assertiveness, anger,
and power as she could muster. After a few minutes, we ended our
conversation and I sat back, struck at how neuroscience could indeed be
applied to psychotherapy. It is impossible for me to know with any
certainty whether what I had done with Jan during our one meeting had
anything to do with the changes she experienced during her flashbacks.
If it did, perhaps the active ingredient was the simultaneous activation
of the verbal areas of the left hemisphere along with the emotional
centers of the right hemisphere and limbic structures that stored the
flashbacks. Being simultaneously aware of inner and outer worlds may
support a higher level of cortical functioning and increased network
integration. In other words, this process results in a memory
configuration that is no longer implicit only but instead becomes
integrated with the contextualizing properties of explicit systems of
memory in the cerebral cortex (Siegel, 1995). Speechless terror, which
has been recognized as part of posttraumatic reactions since ancient
times, now has a neural correlate consistent with what is known about
brain functions. Why does Broca's area become inhibited during trauma?
Why would evolution select silence in times of crisis? Perhaps when one
is threatened it is better to either run or fight or simply keep quiet
and hope to stay undetected. In other words, evolution has taught the
brain to "Shut up and do something!" when in danger. The freezing
reaction of animals (being still and quiet when they sense a predator)
allows them to be less visible (because a still and silent target is
more difficult to detect). Spoken language is sound, which primitive
fear circuitry is able to silence. Perhaps those early prehumans who
hung around for conversation and negotiation with predators didn't fare
well enough to

pass down as many genes as did those who either kept quiet, fought, or
ran away. The Addiction to Stress and Self-Harm Every form of addiction
is bad, no matter whether the narcotic be alcohol or morphine or
idealism. ---C. G. Jung Another clinical phenomenon with a possible
biochemical mechanism is what appears to be an addiction to stress
experienced by some patients with PTSD. While anxious and ill at ease in
normal daily life, they report feeling calm and competent in risky or
life-threatening situations. A socalled normal life leaves traumatized
persons a blank screen onto which their dysregulated psyches can project
fearful experiences, keeping them in a state of vigilance and fear
(Fish-Murry, Koby, & van der Kolk, 1987). This may motivate the creation
of stress, making a traumatized person vulnerable to creating new
trauma. The new trauma would, in turn, stimulate the production of
endogenous opioids that would lead to an increased sense of calm and
well-being. Paradoxically, trauma would lead to a sense of competency
and control. Because these individuals are so physically worn down by
this lifestyle, they often present in therapy with exhaustion,
depression, and a variety of medical conditions. It is as if they have a
drug addiction, except that it is completely unconscious and they are
their own pharmacy. Initial work with these patients should focus on
helping them reduce stress and learn to tolerate and understand the
anxiety triggered by the absence of stress. This can usually be
accomplished through a combination of stress-reduction techniques,
medication, and psychotherapy. The addiction to stress has a related but
more severe variant: self-harm. Adults who engage in repeated self-harm
commonly describe childhoods that included abuse, neglect, or a deep
sense of shame. This correlation has led many theorists to explore the
psychodynamic significance of self-harm as an ongoing negative
attachment to destructive parents. Along these lines, suicide has been
described as the final act of compliance with the parents' unconscious
wish for the death of the child (Green, 1978). There appears to

be a strong association between self-harm and attachment disorders
because self-injurious behaviors are often a response to abandonment and
loss. Endogenous opioids may also play a role in some instances of
self-harm and suicide (van der Kolk, 1988). This opioid system,
originally used to cope with pain, was adapted by later-evolving
networks of attachment to reinforce the positive effects of bonding
(Pitman et al., 1990). Research has demonstrated that the frequency of
self-harm decreases when patients are given a drug to block the effects
of endogenous opioids (Pitman et al., 1990; van der Kolk, 1988).
Abstracting from the animal model, this would suggest that the
endorphins released during injury reverse the feelings of distress
activated by abandonment. The analgesic effects of these morphinelike
substances may account for the reports describing a sense of calm and
relief after individuals cut, burn, or hurt themselves. Thus,
selfinjurious behaviors may be reinforced by both psychological factors
and the endogenous opioid system. Repeated suicide attempts are
reinforced also by the rapid attention of health care professionals,
family, and friends, which may boost endorphin levels triggered by the
arrival of loved ones. When woven into coping strategies as a means of
affect regulation, this attention-getting behavior results in a kind of
characterological suicidality (Schwartz, 1979). This behavior parallels
the distress calls of primates whose endorphin levels drop in the
absence of the mother. The reappearance of the mother results in a
raising of these endorphin levels and the infant discontinues its cry.
Characterological suicidality can come to serve a similar biochemical
regulatory purpose if this system was inadequately formed during
childhood. Although there are many sound psychological explanations for
the relationship of childhood abuse with self-harm and suicidality, a
pharmacological intervention designed to block the impact of endogenous
endorphins may also prove helpful. The Brain and Borderline Personality
Disorder Life began with waking up and loving my mother's face.
---George Eliot According to Freud, participation in analysis requires
sufficient ego strength to withstand the stress of therapy while
simultaneously maintaining contact

with reality. Based on this assumption, Freud did his best to make sure
that his prospective clients were not psychotic. Psychotic individuals
are characterized by severe distortions of reality, thought disorders,
and decompensation under stress. They are also unable to differentiate
their transference and other projective processes from external reality.
Despite Freud's best efforts to screen out these clients from analysis,
every so often he got a surprise. People who appeared to be neurotic
would become psychotic during analysis. Freud referred to these people
as having psychic structures on the borderline between neurotic and
psychotic. Over the years, the conception of a borderline psychic
structure has evolved into what is now called borderline personality
disorder (BPD). As we have already seen, BPD may represent one variant
of complex PTSD, an idea supported by the frequent occurrence of early
abuse, trauma, and the presence of dissociative symptoms in borderline
individuals. Patients who carry this diagnosis are characterized by the
following: 1. Hypersensitivity to real or imagined abandonment. 2.
Disturbances of self-identity. 3. Intense and unstable relationships. 4.
Alternating idealization and devaluation of themselves and others
(black-and-white thinking). 5. Compulsive, risky, and sometimes
self-destructive behaviors. Although there are a number of theories
concerning its cause, many feel that the etiology of BPD stems from
early deficits in emotional regulation and problematic attachment
relationships. Research also suggests that affective disorders in these
patients and their parents occur above chance levels. This may lead to a
combination of parental instability and biological difficulties of
emotional regulation within the child. Overall, both their reported
history and their symptoms suggest that early attachment was experienced
as traumatic, emotionally dysregulating, and possibly life threatening.
I have come to feel that borderline individuals provide us with a window
into the intense and chaotic experience of infancy. As we have seen (
and this is where our neuroscientific knowledge comes in handy), the

amygdala is highly functional at birth. Remember that the amygdala is at
the center of neural networks involving both fear and attachment. The
hippocampal and cortical networks that eventually organize and inhibit
the amygdala grow gradually through childhood. Because of this
developmental timetable and the prolonged dependence on others for
survival, the experience of relationships must sometimes be as
overwhelmingly frightening to infants as it is to patients with BPD. The
symptoms that emerge in this disorder cause patients to create
problematic and chaotic relationships that can lead them through a
lifetime of abandonments. It is even common for therapists to abandon
these patients because of their intense criticism and hostility. I find
that conceptualizing BPD patients essentially as frightened children
helps me take their attacks less personally and maintain a therapeutic
stance. I suspect that their primitive fear, rage, and shame are a form
of early implicit memory activated by real or imagined criticism or
abandonment. When these memory networks are triggered during treatment,
they are so powerful that the patient is unable to maintain contact with
reality. We see the same phenomena in PTSD flashbacks, most likely
stored in the same implicit memory systems. This confused Freud because
he believed everyone was either neurotic or psychotic. BPD was a horse
of a different color. Examining BPD in light of the neuroscience we have
reviewed in previous chapters, here are a few of the neurobiological
processes that may explain how these symptoms become encoded within
neural networks: 1. Amygdaloid memory systems are primed during early
traumatic attachment experiences to react to any indication of
abandonment. A sympathetic fight-or-flight reaction is triggered, and
baseline levels of stress hormones are raised. 2. Orbitofrontal systems
are inadequately developed during attachment to engage in healthy
self-soothing and the successful inhibition of the amygdala. 3.
Orbitofrontal dissociation may result in disconnection between right-and
left-hemisphere and top-down processing, partly accounting for rapid and
dramatic shifts between positive and negative appraisals of
relationships. 4. The networks of the social brain are unable to
internalize images from early interactions with caretakers that could

provide self-soothing and affect regulation. 5. Rapid fluctuations
between sympathetic and parasympathetic states result in baseline
irritability and a low threshold for sympathetic responses to real or
imagined abandonment. 6. Chronic high levels of stress hormones
compromise hippocampal functioning, decreasing the brain's ability to
control amygdala functioning and exacerbating emotional dyscontrol. 7.
Amygdaloid dyscontrol heightens the impact of early memory on adult
functioning, increasing the contemporary impact of early bonding
failures. 8. Hippocampal compromise decreases reality testing and memory
functioning, hindering the maintenance of positive or soothing memories
during states of high arousal. 9. Early bonding failures lead to lower
levels of serotonin, resulting in greater risk of depression,
irritability, and decreased positive reinforcement from interpersonal
interactions. 10. Self-harm during dysregulated states results in
endorphin release and a sense of calm, putting these individuals at risk
for repeated self-abusive behavior. These are just some of the factors
that may be involved in the neurobiology of BPD. Because this diagnosis
has so far been outside the purview of neurology, little brain research
has been done with BPD patients. However, neuropsychological findings
with these patients do suggest dysfunction in the frontal and temporal
lobes (Paris, Zelkowitz, Guzder, Joseph, & Feldman, 1999;
Swirsky-Sacchetti et al., 1993). Executive and memory functions within
these brain networks do not provide adequate organization for these
patients. We have learned that these functions are built and sculpted in
the context of early relationships; it makes sense that they are
impaired in BPD patients. The central concepts in the treatment are
structure and limit setting, combined with flexibility and patience
(just as it is with raising children). The therapist must provide an
external scaffolding within which the client can rebuild these brain
networks of memory, self-organization, and affect regulation. On another

level, the therapist serves as an external neural circuit to aid in the
integration of networks left disconnected during development. Neural
Network Integration The patient discovers his true self little-by-little
through experiencing his own feelings and needs, because the analyst is
able to accept and respect them. ---Alice Miller Unresolved trauma
disrupts integrated neural processing, so that conscious awareness is
split from emotional and physiological experiences. In fact,
dissociative symptoms immediately following a traumatic event are
predictive of the later development of PTSD (Koopman et al., 1994;
McFarlane & Yehuda, 1996). Neurochemical changes and a lack of
integration of right and left hemisphere functions may also impede
interpersonal bonding and bodily regulation (Henry, Satz, & Saslow,
1984). Children victimized by psychological, physical, and sexual abuse
have been shown to have a significantly greater probability of brainwave
abnormalities in the left frontal and temporal regions (Ito et al.,
1993). Brainwave dyscoherence may put individuals at higher risk for
developing all forms of psychiatric disorders (Teicher et al., 1997).
The biochemical changes that occur secondary to trauma enhance primitive
(subcortical) stimulus--response pairing of conditioned responses
related to sensation, emotion, and behavior. These same changes
undermine cortical systems dedicated to the integration of learning
across systems of memory into a coherent and conscious narrative
(Siegel, 1996). As we understand more about the neurobiological
processes underlying PTSD, we will better learn how to treat and
possibly prevent this debilitating yet curable mental illness. Therapies
of all kinds, especially those within the cognitive schools, have proven
successful in the reintegration of neural processing subsequent to
trauma. Systematic desensitization, exposure, and response prevention
can all enhance these integrative processes. Summary

The brain's reaction to trauma provides us with a window to the
functions and effects of neural network dissociation. From the
physiological symptoms of adult PTSD to the characterological
adaptations of long-term adjustment to early trauma, we see the brain,
body, and psyche attempting to survive in the face of overwhelming
dysregulation. The array of adaptations to stress and trauma are at the
core of the work of the psychotherapist. The safe emergency of
psychotherapy activates dissociated neural networks and attempts to
reintegrate them in the service of decreased arousal and improved
functioning. From the first moments of life, stress shapes our brains in
ways that lead us to remember experiences most important for survival.
We need to expand our notion of trauma from the fields of combat and
catastrophic events to the small and everyday interactions on which we
depend for our survival. Most of our learning is not traumatic but
rather subtle, nondramatic, and unconscious. The interactions between
parent and child, the politics of the schoolyard, and experiences of
small victories and defeats all contribute to shaping who we will
become. We need to always keep in mind that as primates, attachment
equals survival and abandonment equals death. This may help us
appreciate the power of parental abuse and abandonment to shape children
for the rest of their lives. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 15

The Self in Exile: Narcissism and Pathological Caretaking Happiness is
having a large, loving, caring, close-knit family in another city.
---George Burns Each of us is born twice: first from our mother's body
over a few hours, and then again from our parents' psyche over a
lifetime. As we have seen, the organization of the social brain is
initially sculpted via parent--child interactions. These interactions
shape the infrastructure of our moment-tomoment experience of other
people and of the world. As the child's brain continues to form,
self-awareness and self-identity gradually coalesce. Consciousness and
identity are complex functions constructed from the contributions of
multiple, primarily nonconscious, neural networks. Pathological states
highlight the fact that the self is a fragile construction of the brain.
Furthermore, there is considerable flexibility in the location,
experience, and organization of the self within our imagination. Victims
of rape and torture frequently report out-of-body experiences during
their ordeal. A young woman named Joanne described to me, in great
detail, how she stood behind a closet door, watching herself being raped
from across the room from where it was actually happening. Another
client, Mark, who had been brutally attacked while getting into his car
after work, told me that he watched himself from across the street as he
was repeatedly stabbed. The perception of the self is also vulnerable to
alteration and distortion. Anorectic clients, with their bones
protruding through their skin and their health in serious jeopardy,
insist they look fat. Patients with multiple personalities are perhaps
the most complex example of the plasticity of self, because they
generate many different subpersonalities associated with different
experiences and emotional states.

Narcissism, a common form of self disturbance, is often related to a
reversal of the mirroring process during childhood. Narcissistic
children's social brains and sense of self are not shaped by their own
emerging emotions and sensibilities; rather, they are determined by
their parents' need for nurturance, attunement, and affect regulation.
What emerges in the narcissist is what Winnicott called the false self,
a pseudo-adult embedded in the networks of the left hemisphere
interpreter, which filters out emotional input from the right hemisphere
and the body. In this chapter, we explore the reversal of the mirroring
process, and the adult conditions of pathological caretaking and
codependency that emerge from these early suboptimal attachment
experiences (Bachar et al., 2008). Silent Hammers I cannot give you the
formula for success, but I can give you the formula for failure---which
is...try to please everybody. ---Herbert Swope Jerry, a successful
screenwriter, came to therapy complaining of depression and exhaustion.
His long work hours and last-minute deadlines kept him in a constant
state of stress. His minimal personal life centered on his girlfriend,
Cara, whom he described as "high maintenance," likening their
relationship to having a second job. Jerry experienced his life as a
relentless struggle to please Cara, his boss, and everyone he knew.
Despite his depression, Jerry felt guilty about coming to therapy, and
expressed fear about wasting my time; he felt that he was the helper,
not the one who received help. "After all," he said to me, "you could be
spending your time seeing someone who really needs the help." After a
few sessions, it became clear to me that Jerry had spent the first half
of his 39 years taking care of his immature and self-centered parents.
All of his subsequent relationships appeared to fall into a similar
pattern. Although he described his romantic relationships in positive
terms, he also reported feeling deprived of attention and nurturance. He
seemed to be attempting to please others in order to gain the love and
attention he had always longed for from his parents. His efforts would
invariably end in sadness, resentment, and withdrawal. Although he was
exhausted from

trying so hard and failing so completely, Jerry still maintained the
hope that his efforts would someday pay off. Working with Jerry was both
fascinating and frustrating. He questioned nearly everything I said,
revealing his distrust of anyone's ability to help him. On the other
hand, his flair for the dramatic resulted in entertaining stories in
almost every session. He had an uncanny ability to intuit my interests,
and I would often lapse into being the audience for his one-man show. I
soon realized that Jerry experienced me as another person to entertain
and take care of while he waited to receive care in return. At the same
time, he resisted my every attempt to help him. Jerry was hesitant to
discuss his childhood, saying that he remembered little of his life
before he left for college. Our sessions consisted primarily of stories
of his interactions with unappreciative others and his attempts to
enlist my understanding and support for his side of the story. He was
both comforted by my compassion and annoyed with my continued
suggestions that he pay attention to his inner emotional world,
especially when engaged with others. The intensity of his defenses
reflected his emotional vulnerability and I needed to be careful not to
move too quickly. On the other hand, if I went too slowly, he might
become resentful and terminate therapy, as he had ended so many other
relationships. At some point, I suggested that he write a screenplay
about himself. Jerry agreed and soon created a story about a little man
named Hal who sat at a control panel in his head. Hal was a sort of
ship's captain at the helm of the U.S.S. Jerry. When Jerry was alone,
Hal would monitor the people in Jerry's life. A wall full of TV screens
kept track of where they were, what they were doing, and whether they
were thinking of Jerry. When he would come into contact with another
ship, like his girlfriend Cara, Hal would select a holographic image of
Jerry specifically for that person. Hal had a screen to monitor Jerry
from the perspective of the other ship, to make sure that the hologram
had the desired effect. Hal's purpose was best described by the show
business adage: "Give the people what they want." I was impressed by the
clarity of the story of Hal. Jerry was telling me that his sense of self
was organized around his theory of the minds of others. Nothing about
Hal focused on Jerry's own thoughts, feelings, or needs. Jerry only knew
he needed to understand the needs of others; for him, this was love;
this was life. I realized Hal reflected the early sculpting of Jerry's
social brain and how he survived childhood. The story of Hal was

a reflection of implicit memory, symbolically representing the core
emotional drama from his early life. Despite the obvious nature of this
story, Jerry refused to entertain interpretations. He seemed to have
great difficulty experiencing the world from his own point of view. In
Jerry's conscious experience, he was Hal. A few sessions later, Jerry
used another metaphor to illustrate his inner world. He described
himself as a house on a movie set with a perfectly detailed facade but
no finished interior; there was no true place to live. If you looked
behind the facade there were only exposed 2×4s and bare floors. He said,
"A good director knows how to place his cameras to maintain the illusion
of a real building." In a moment of receptivity and trust, he told me
that his goal for therapy was to finish building and decorating the
interior space so he could stop worrying about camera angles. Jerry was
tired of feeling like a fraud in a world of real people. I could feel
his inner world shifting as his emptiness surfaced into consciousness. I
told Jerry, "As we grow, the story of who we are is written in
collaboration with those around us, especially our parents. They watch
us, listen to us, and try to help us put into words what we struggle to
express. This helps us to write our story. When parents didn't get this
help as children, or are suffering with some problem, they may look to
their children to help them find themselves." I think this is what may
have happened with Jerry's parents. He learned to be sensitive to them
and attend to their needs when they should have been helping him write
his story. In a sense, Jerry's story was written by default; in serving
others he was hoping to find himself, and after all these years he was
still searching. I suggested to Jerry that his choice of a writing
career may have been an expression of his desire to write his story.
Although there are many good and honorable aspects to serving others, I
told him that it may be more important to write a new story where his
own needs would be balanced with the needs of others. Jerry asked, "Is
this why, when people ask me how I am, the first thing I think about is
how others in my life feel?" I nodded as I watched the muscles in his
face relax. A new understanding of a familiar behavior was emerging, and
his inner world was being reorganized. After a period of silence, he
said softly, "I even do it with you, don't I? I pay you to take care of
me, but I end up entertaining you and protecting you from my needs and
negative feelings." The session was over and he walked silently out of
the

office. I wondered if he would be able to withstand the stress of these
insights enough to return for our next session. He did come back, and
uncharacteristically touched my shoulder as he passed me on the way to
his seat. "You're gonna think you're pretty smart when I tell you this
one." I noticed his voice had changed: It was no longer the voice of an
entertainer. Jerry was sharing this experience from a different place
within himself. On the previous Friday, he had gone out with Cara and
they didn't get back to her apartment until 3:00 A.M. The combination of
alcohol and exhaustion made him fall asleep as soon as his head hit the
pillow. After what seemed like only a few minutes, he was jarred awake
by the banging of hammers outside the bedroom window. He picked up his
throbbing head and saw on the clock that it was not even 7:00 in the
morning. Jerry said, "I felt like my head was going to explode!" Jerry's
face became increasingly tense as he described the murderous fantasies
passing through his mind. He imagined going outside and punching out the
entire team of construction workers. Just as he was about to jump up and
run outside, Cara looked up at him with an expression of exhausted rage
and said, "I'm going to go out there and kill those guys." Apparently,
they had been waking her up that way for most of the week. Falling back
on the couch in my office and letting out a sigh, Jerry began to
describe how her words triggered something altogether familiar within
him. "When I heard Cara's anger I became a different person. My
exhaustion vanished. I felt energized and alive! I completely forgot
about the construction workers. My total focus instantaneously shifted
to making Cara feel better." He described jumping up as if well-rested
and said, "A little breakfast will make you feel better." He became
oblivious to the sound of the hammers and bounded into the kitchen as
Cara pulled the pillows back over her head. Ten minutes later, Jerry was
at the stove brewing coffee, frying eggs, and about to call out
"Breakfast is served," when he again noticed the hammers. He said, "I
was amazed that I hadn't heard them since I had gotten out of bed." He
realized that they hadn't stopped, but from the moment he saw the anger
on Cara's face, he became completely involved in activities to cope with
her feelings, utterly ignoring his own. He realized that attending to
Cara's distress catapulted him out of his own. As he stood, spatula in
hand, these feelings triggered a long-forgotten memory. He remembered
coming home from school to find his mother

crying, head down in her arms on the kitchen table. Jerry remembered his
terror as he went over and stood beside her. She didn't respond when he
asked her what was wrong; she just continued sobbing. He didn't know
what to do or who to call. His father had left them months before, and
his mother had grown more silent and withdrawn with each passing week.
He stood motionless, not knowing if she was even aware of his presence.
He tried to engage her in conversation, telling her about his day at
school. He even told some inappropriate jokes in the hope of getting her
angry enough to chase after him. She remained silent, crushed by the
weight of her sadness. Jerry recalled growing increasingly desperate and
afraid as time passed. He stood motionless as the afternoon light turned
to dusk. He eventually came up with the idea to cook for her and went
over to the stove to fry her some eggs, the only thing he knew how to
make. After collecting what he needed, he pulled a chair over to the
stove, stood on it, and started to cook. This seemed to get her
attention. She came over and they cooked together in silence. During our
first few sessions, Jerry had mentioned his parents' divorce, his
father's drinking, and his mother's depression. He characterized his
home as "a vault of silence" with very little interaction or shared
activities. The family took no meals or vacations together; most of
their energy was used up in day-to-day survival. He spoke of these
things in passing, with little emotion and an insistence that his
childhood had no connection to his adult difficulties. He said he had
coped with his family situation by burying himself in books and writing
stories. This memory provided evidence for what I had suspected; Jerry
had grown up with too much stress and too little parenting. He had lost
himself in everyone else's stories but had not received the emotional
support and mirroring he needed to write his own. Jerry came away from
the experience of the hammers and the memories they triggered with a new
perspective. He could see, from this and other childhood memories that
began to emerge, how he was constantly frightened by the emotional
instability and distance of his parents. It was also clear that he, like
Hal, was constantly monitoring the feelings and needs of others. I found
it especially fascinating how his own anger, frustration, and exhaustion
disappeared in the face of Cara's negative feelings. He later told me
that he figured this was why he felt so uncomfortable and vulnerable
when he wasn't in a relationship. Never

having learned how to regulate his own feelings, it was safer to stay in
the minds of others. The power of these insights was unsettling for
Jerry, and it took him many weeks to get back on track. As he regained
his equilibrium, we began to apply this new knowledge to more aspects of
his life. Thinking back on his romantic partners, he realized that they
were never as good at anticipating or attending to his needs as he was
to theirs. This imbalance led him to feel unloved and uncared for. At
one point, he stood up abruptly and shouted, "I blamed them for not
being as sick as I am." Jerry came to understand that feeling like an
empty shell was connected to not knowing his own feelings. He said, "My
feelings were never important when I was a kid. It's my feelings that
are going to furnish those empty rooms inside of me and I have to have
my own feelings to be whole." These experiences were a turning point in
Jerry's treatment. We created a common language and used it to explore
Jerry's inner world. Hal gradually replaced some of the old monitors
with new ones designed to track Jerry's own feelings. Eventually, Hal
and his monitors became unnecessary. At times, Jerry feared he was being
too selfish by considering his own needs. He did lose some friends who
relied on his constant and unilateral attention. Cara and Jerry grew
closer, however, and she admitted that she liked Jerry better when he
didn't try to make her happy all the time. Jerry slowly recovered from
his pathological caretaking and graduated to become a caring person.
Jerry's difficulties highlight a number of principles related to the
development and organization of the brain that we examined in previous
chapters. During childhood, Jerry's brain adapted to a demanding and
nonnurturing emotional environment. From early in life, his survival
depended on being highly aware of the feelings and needs of his parents.
The neural systems of his social brain became hypersensitive to his
parents' facial expressions, body language, and behaviors. This
hypersensitivity helped Jerry monitor his parents' emotions and behave
in ways that regulated their feelings and bonded them to him. Systems
normally used to help children come to experience themselves were
usurped to monitor other people in his life. This was how Hal was born.
Jerry's mirroring skills continued to be utilized in adulthood with his
friends, employers, and therapist through emotional caretaking and
entertaining stories.

Because Jerry didn't have help processing and integrating his own
emotions during childhood, they remained chaotic, frightening, and
overwhelming long into his adult years. Caretaking was reinforced not
only by those he attracted, but by the avoidance of his own disorganized
emotions by attending to the feelings of others. Caretaking evolved into
a form of affect regulation, as well as a way of connecting to others
via a false self (Hal). This was demonstrated by the instantaneous
inhibition of his feelings of anger at the construction workers when he
realized Cara was awake and upset. From early in development, hidden
layers of neural processing organized the inhibition of his own feelings
and directed his social brain to focus on the internal state of others.
This neural network organization was in place prior to Jerry's
development of self-conscious awareness, making this way of experiencing
the world completely unconscious and an a priori assumption in his life.
Jerry's evolving sense of self was shaped via these processes, through
the eyes, minds, and hearts of others. Left-hemisphere processing
networks, which inhibit affect and participate in the creation of
stories about the self, allowed Jerry to become a functional adult with
a successful writing career. His ability to describe himself
symbolically, first as a monitoring robot and then as a director
planning camera angles, reflected his subconscious awareness of his
self-organization. Without assistance in connecting these insights to
the organization of his conscious self, they remained correct but
useless bits of information contained within dissociated neural
networks. Interpretations---such as the one Jerry made connecting his
cooking eggs for Cara and taking care of his mother---triggered emotions
of sadness and loss. Making his defenses conscious appeared to activate
the emotional networks that the defenses had been inhibiting. The higher
association areas involved in the organization of conscious awareness
appear capable of the plasticity required for qualitative changes of
experience. Implicit memories of early childhood---stored within
networks of the social brain---were experienced emotionally and
expressed in a variety of ways including Jerry's distrust of the ability
of others to help him. These were echoes of his disappointment in his
parents' inability to assist him when he was young. Jerry's insecure
attachment resulted in a complex array of emotional and behavioral
adaptations. His lack of conscious recall for much of his childhood was
one example. Another was his unconscious expectation that the expression
of his needs would be met by more emotional pain. All of

Jerry's struggle to attain love and caring reflected his brain's
adaptation to a childhood full of impingements and the absence of an
integrated and integrating other. Jerry's parents did not assist him in
creating a narrative identity grounded in his own experience. In
therapy, I helped Jerry apply his considerable creative skills to write
his own story. Interpretations and Neural Plasticity There's a world of
difference between truth and facts. Facts can obscure the truth. ---Maya
Angelou You may remember that interpretations are sometimes referred to
as the therapist's scalpel. In making an interpretation, the therapist
points out an unconscious aspect of the patient's experience, such as a
defense he or she is using to avoid negative feelings. For a client who
employs humor to avoid feelings of abandonment after a divorce, it might
entail reminding him that he is experiencing many symptoms of depression
or that his eyes are moist. For another who is enraged at a minor slight
by a coworker, an interpretation might consist of connecting her present
feelings to emotional memories of abuse from a previous relationship. In
both of these instances, the therapist addresses what appears to be a
disconnection among different tracks of cognitive, emotional, sensory,
and behavioral processing. When an interpretation is accurate and
delivered in an appropriate and well-timed manner, a number of things
occur. The client generally becomes quiet; there may be a change in
facial expressions, posture, and tone of voice. Very often the client
will begin to fully experience the emotions against which he or she was
defending. There is a shift from fluent reflexive language to speaking
in a slower and more self-reflective manner. Some clients report
becoming confused or disoriented, whereas others describe physiological
symptoms of panic or grief. Borderline clients can demonstrate extreme
reactions to interpretations, including losing emotional control and
functional decompensation. They may become extremely emotional, bolt
from the consulting room, and engage in self-injurious behavior.
Patients like these appear unable to cope with the emotions released
when their defenses are made conscious.

What might be happening in the brain during and after an accurate and
well-timed interpretation? Each interpretation that hits home is like
the death of a small aspect of the false self. My suspicion is that it
begins with seeing past the products of the left hemisphere interpreter,
which disinhibits the activation of subcortical circuits containing
negative memories. In the process of working through these new feelings,
the client gradually regains emotional equilibrium, allowing for
plasticity and new learning in prefrontal regions. The concurrent
availability of negative subcortical memories and the enhanced ability
of the cortex to create new connections allows neural networks
containing various components of a particular memory to become
integrated. Like breaking and resetting a bone that has healed badly,
memories become unstable and can be reformed in a more positive way.
This process allows painful implicit memories to be accessed by cortical
networks for contextualization in time and space, and to be regulated
and inhibited where no longer necessary. Bringing a defense to
consciousness activates both the cortical networks that organize the
defense and the subcortical networks that contain the negative memories
and associated affect. This disinhibition results in the emotional and
physiological arousal seen in therapy as the amygdala becomes
reactivated and alerts the body to the old danger. This may also be the
mechanism for regression through the reactivation of old
sensorymotor-affective memories stored in normally inhibited amygdaloid
systems. There is most likely a shift in hemispheric bias from left to
right, correlated with the breakthrough of negative emotions. This
left-to-right shift may account for the cessation of reflexive social
language of the left hemisphere interpreter and a shift to greater
self-awareness. Interpretations need to undergo a process called working
through, meaning they need to be stated, restated, and applied to
multiple situations and circumstances (parallel to relapse prevention in
cognitive therapies). This process serves to connect new learning to
multiple memory networks, and may need to reach a certain critical mass
of connections throughout the brain to become reflexive. Working through
reflects the expansion and stabilization of new associative matrices of
memory. It is also reflected in the construction of a new narrative
containing altered aspects of behaviors, feelings, and self-identity
that serve as a way to retain and reinforce new learning.

Pathological Caretaking By the time a man is 35, he knows that the
images of the right man, the tough man, the true man which he received
in high school do not work in life. ---Robert Bly Jerry's pathological
caretaking is one possible expression of a disturbance of self referred
to as narcissism. Narcissism is characterized by a two-sided existence:
one reflecting an inflated sense of self-importance, the other mired in
emptiness and despair. The origin of this formation of the self occurs
when a child looking for love and attunement instead discovers the
mother's own predicament (Miller, 1981). The child, robbed of the
possibility of self-discovery, compensates by caring for the parent
under a real or imagined threat of abandonment. Bright and sensitive
children attune to and regulate the parents' emotions and come to
reflect what the parents want from them. These children will usually
appear mature beyond their years and find comfort in their ability to
regulate the feelings of the people around them. Because of their power
to regulate the affect of one or both parents, these children are filled
with a sense of inflated self-importance. Miller and Winnicott call
pathological caretaking a particular manifestation of the false self,
described by Jerry as both a theatrical facade and an inner robot
monitoring others. The other side of narcissism reflects aspects of the
child's emotional world that have found no mirroring. This true self, or
the part that is unique to the individual and searching for expression,
is left undeveloped and eventually forgotten. This emotional core (or
inner child) secretly and silently awaits parenting in each new
relationship while dutifully taking care of the other. This aspect of
the emotional self is the emptiness, loss, and shame of being abandoned,
and how survival was contingent on taking care of others. This is the
source of depression, the sense of being a fraud, and lack of an
emotional connection with life. The development of the social brain (and
the subsequent formation of the sense of self) becomes dedicated to the
prediction of, and attunement to, the moods and needs of the parent and
others. This ability serves to ward off abandonment anxiety while
truncating the development of an

understanding, expression, and regulation of one's own feelings. Such
children grow into self-awareness experiencing others' emotions as their
own, and an overwhelming sense of responsibility, or even compulsion, to
regulate the emotions of those around them. In Jerry's case, cooking
breakfast for the upset women in his life helped him avoid his own
poorly understood and dysregulated emotional world. Thus, caretaking of
others serves as a substitute for self-soothing abilities and inner
emotional organization. Pathological caretakers come to therapy
primarily because they are depressed and exhausted by their inability to
create a boundary between themselves and the needs of others. Although
being with others is hard work, being alone is even more difficult when
they are not exhausted, because they need to regulate others to avoid
their internal world. For these people, a battering or abusive
relationship is far less frightening than solitude. Caretakers are
difficult clients because they have learned during early attachment
relationships that help is not forthcoming when they are in distress.
Like Jerry, they have come to believe that it is best to put their inner
needs out of mind and keep "giving the people what they want." Alice
Miller: Archaeologist of Childhood Experience I was not out to paint
beautiful pictures.... I wanted only to help the truth burst forth.
---Alice Miller The central importance of parental relationships in
shaping the social brain is nowhere better articulated than in a series
of elegantly simple works by the Viennese psychotherapist Alice Miller.
Her work with what she called gifted children targeted adults, like
Jerry, who were raised by parents whose emotional needs were greater
than their ability to attune to their children. Taking a stand against
her analytic colleagues, Miller reshaped the therapeutic role into one
of being an advocate for the child within her adult patients. Reaching
back through the years to reconnect with long-forgotten childhood
experiences, she reinterpreted much of her clients' adult behaviors as a
reflection of their adaptational histories. In observing the nonverbal
reenactment of implicit memory, Miller formed hypotheses

concerning what her clients had been exposed to, how their young brains
had adapted, and what it would take to unearth the abandoned true self.
Miller's archaeological view of memory included the awareness that
memory from different developmental stages reflects different modes of
processing and understanding. In her role as advocate, she saw therapy
as a process in which therapists help clients unearth their history, not
from the point of view of the adult but from that of the child. Memories
in these implicit subcortical networks do not change with time, but
remain in their initial form as they were experienced at a very young
age. Miller formulated this view from clinical experience rather than a
knowledge of the multiple systems of explicit and implicit memory.
Miller used the term double amnesia to describe the process by which
these children have had to first forget certain parts of themselves
(e.g., feelings, thoughts, and fantasies) that could not be accepted or
tolerated in their family. The second layer of forgetting is to forget
that these feelings have been forgotten. These two layers of forgetting
ensured that such children would not slip back into wanting what could
not be had. Given our knowledge of the multiple systems of memory and
their dissociability, Miller's double amnesia is most likely grounded in
both the disconnection between systems of implicit and explicit memory,
and constructing a selfnarrative that excludes reference to personal
needs. The lack of assistance in the construction of a self-narrative,
combined with the heightened anxiety and vigilance necessary for
survival with narcissistic caretakers, leads to a deficit in the
consolidation of autobiographical memory. The memories are not
repressed; rather, they are unorganized by hippocampal cortical systems
that would allow them to be accessible to conscious consideration. In
this light, Miller's work is a reconstruction of the past, based on
available conscious memory in combination with nonverbal expressions
from implicit systems of memory. Such patients' present experiences are
examined for emotional truths, then traced back through a hypothesized
trajectory. The patients' considerable empathic ability can be utilized
to their advantage by asking how they think some other child might feel
in a situation similar to their own. This method, used a number of
times, is often successful. For Miller, gifted children are exquisitely
sensitive to the cues of parents and have the innate ability to mold
themselves to their parents' conscious and unconscious messages. These
are the children who often

come to be called codependent and are overrepresented in the service
professions such as doctors, nurses, social workers, and therapists. In
essence, their jobs are an attempt to parlay their defenses into a
career. Jerry ---with his sensitivity, intellect, and wit---fit well in
this category. Although the gifted children described by Miller may be
quite functional, they often feel empty and devoid of vitality. Because
their vitality and true self are not acceptable, these are inhibited and
banished from awareness. This creates a vulnerability, not only to
disturbances in personality but also to the unconscious transmission of
"mirror reversal" to the next generation. Parents who have not been
adequately parented themselves can look to their children for the
nurturance and care they were unable to receive years before. Miller
stated, "What these mothers had once failed to find in their own mothers
they were able to find in their children, someone at their disposal who
can be used as an echo, who can be controlled, is completely centered on
them, will never desert them, and offers full attention and admiration"
(1981, Chapter 3). Children's instinct to bond with their parents drives
them to do so regardless of the terms and conditions. When such children
look into their mother's eyes and find no reflection but, rather, "the
mother's own predicament," they will mold themselves (if able) to their
mother's psychic needs. Compulsive compliance---initially adaptive in
response to narcissistic or abusive caretakers---becomes maladaptive in
relationships with others, and in the development of the self
(Crittenden & DiLalla, 1988). Later in life, the gifted child's lack of
rebellion becomes the problem. Unable to attend to their own emotional
memories, and thus unable to construct the story of their lives, these
children constantly search for someone who needs nurturance. Because he
or she was completely helpless in childhood to resist the coercion of
the parents' unconscious, Miller felt that the child within the adult
patient always needs an advocate. Our brains are designed to adapt to
the environmental contingencies presented to us. Remember that the
child's first reality is the parents' unconscious, transferred via
right-hemisphere-toright-hemisphere attunement well before
self-awareness and self-identity. Because it is implanted in early
implicit memory, it is never experienced as anything other than the
self. Miller was quick to describe the tragedy for the parents who may
be well aware of the pain from their own childhood and may have vowed to
never make their children feel as they did. The

intergenerational transmission continues because it is reflexive and
unconscious, and because each generation, at some level, protects the
image of the parents and guards against the pain of their own
unfulfilled emotional needs. Although patients do not generally have
explicit memory for early relationships with their parents, Miller
posits that these learning experiences are implicitly recorded in how
the patients think of and treat themselves. The strictness and
negativity in the patients' self-image and superego will expose their
parents' negative or indifferent attitudes toward them years before
(Miller, 1983). These implicit emotional and behavioral memories--- in
the form of attitudes, anxieties, and self-statements---contribute to
the continued repression of real emotions and needs. Because children
equate punishment with guilt, abuse and neglect create a sense of innate
badness. A teacher told Dr. Miller that after seeing a film about the
Holocaust, several children in her class said, "But the Jews must have
been guilty or they wouldn't have been punished like that" (Miller,
1983, Chapter 9). This assumption of guilt on the part of children both
protects the parent and serves as the developmental core of a negative
selfimage. Because this self-image is organized and stored by implicit
systems of affective memory, the child's later-developing identity forms
around this a priori negative core. Caretaking and compulsive
perfectionism reflect the ongoing attempt to compensate for the
certainty of unworthiness and anticipation of abandonment. René Magritte
and His Mother We must not fear daylight just because it almost always
illuminates a miserable world. ---René Magritte A chilling example of
the reversal of the mirroring process is demonstrated in a painting by
the surrealist René Magritte, titled The Spirit of Geometry (see Figure
15.1). It depicts a mother holding a child but with a startling twist:
Their heads and faces have been exchanged. Magritte was the eldest of
three boys in a middle-class household in turn-of-the-century Belgium.
His mother suffered from depression throughout his childhood, and made
multiple suicide attempts. She was, in fact, locked in her room each
night

for her own protection. As a young boy, René was locked in with her to
keep her company. One cold February morning, she managed to slip out of
her room and drowned in the Sambre river. René was obviously not
successful in making his mother's life worth living. Based on his adult
life, it is fair to assume that René was a bright and sensitive child,
and that he suffered from a lack of positive maternal attention for most
or all of his childhood. To lose his mother to suicide at the age of 14
served as an additional blow to his sense of safety as a child. This
painting suggests that the young Magritte looked into his mother's eyes
and found fatigue, depression, and emptiness. In her eyes he read, "You
be the mommy, I'll be the baby," and he complied. In retrospect, a
biographer suggested that Magritte himself seemed at peace only when he
was "tormented by problems" (Gablik, 1985). Much of the body of
Magritte's surrealist work presents us with the message that the world
is not what it appears to be. His respectable middle-class family had a
dark and painful secret at its core, one that became a central aspect of
the young boy's experience. Although as an adult, Magritte repeatedly
stated that his early experiences had no bearing on his artistic work,
it is difficult to imagine that the loss, betrayal, and abandonment of
his childhood did not reverberate in his many works, warning us not to
be fooled by the assumptions on which we depend. Summary The separation
between the true and false selves reflects the brain's ability to
develop dissociated tracks of experience. Early trauma and stress in
nonhealing environments can even result in the formation of multiple
separate personalities, now referred to as dissociative identity
disorder (DID). It is logical to assume that these different
experiential states are encoded within different patterns of neural
network activation. The existence of pathological caretaking, DID, and
other disorders of the self demonstrate its fragility and its
inclination to adapt to whatever social realities are presented to it.
The purpose of both the brain and the self is survival. For each of us,
the organization of our own self---including our personality, defenses,
coping styles, and the like---reflects the conditions to which we have
had to adapt. Put another way, all aspects of the self are forms of
implicit memory

stored in neural networks that organize emotion, sensation, and
behavior. These networks are sculpted in reaction to real or imagined
threats as the brain strives to predict and control its physical and
social environments. OceanofPDF.com

Part VI.

The Reorganization of Experience

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 16

The Evolutionary Necessity of Psychotherapy The useless, the odd, the
peculiar, the incongruous---are the signs of history. ---S. J. Gould The
human brain is an amazing organ, capable of continual growth and
lifelong adaptation to an ever-changing array of challenges. Our
understanding of how the brain accomplishes this mandate increases with
each new theoretical development and technological advance. At the same
time, we are uncovering some of natural selection's more problematic
choices. If necessity is the mother of invention, then evolution itself
has created the necessity for psychotherapy by shaping a brain that is
vulnerable to a wide array of difficulties. Over the last century,
psychotherapists have demonstrated that many of the brain's shortcomings
can be counterbalanced by the application of skillfully applied
techniques in the context of a caring relationship. Thus, in our ability
to link, attune, and regulate each other's brains, evolution has also
provided us a way to heal one another. Because we know that
relationships are capable of building and rebuilding neural structures,
psychotherapy can now be understood as a neurobiological intervention,
with a deep cultural history. In psychotherapy, we are tapping the same
principles and processes available in every relationship to connect to
and heal another brain. In this chapter we focus on the following eight
problematic aspects of brain functioning that cause many people to come
to psychotherapy: 1. The suppression of language and predictive capacity
under stress

2. Divergent hemispheric processing 3. The bias toward early learning 4.
The tenacity of fear 5. The damaging effects of stress hormones 6. The
speed and amount of unconscious processing 7. The primacy of projection
8. Unconscious self-deception This will serve as somewhat of a review in
that it draws on many of the neuroscientific findings previously
discussed. We will then apply some of these principles to a case of
PTSD. The Suppression of Language and Predictive Capacity Under Stress
When a man's knowledge is not in order, the more of it he has the
greater will be his confusion. ---Herbert Spencer When animals hear a
strange and potentially threatening sound, they freeze in their tracks,
become silent, and scan the environment for danger. The logic behind
this primitive reflex is quite clear---being still and silent make us
less likely to be seen or heard as we prepare to respond to a potential
threat. Research suggests that during these states of high arousal,
Broca's area, responsible for speech production, becomes inhibited.
While this response may be a positive adaptation in animals without
language, it is a high price for humans to pay for being frightened.
Putting feelings into words and constructing narratives about our
experiences are integral to emotional regulation, the interweaving of
neural networks of emotion and cognition, and the experience of a
coherent sense of self. Perhaps most important, a lack of language can
separate us from the healing effects of positive connections with
others. The loss of the ability to construct narratives is especially
problematic in situations where individuals are forced into silence by
their abusers, or after enduring the "unspeakable horrors" of torture,
war, or the death of friends and family. Losing the ability to verbalize
feelings also interferes with building descending inhibitory cortical
networks down to the amygdala. You may have had a traumatic experience
like an auto accident or robbery where you

felt compelled to tell the story over and over again in the following
days and weeks. In time, the pressure to tell others diminishes as the
emotions connected to the traumatic events slowly dissipate. I suspect
that telling the story builds circuitry, which contributes to amygdala
inhibition and the dissipation of fear. Just as putting words together
to form sentences requires sequencing and predicting what comes next, so
does moment-to-moment sensorimotor functioning. So, besides its role in
language, Broca's area also contributes to networks of prediction and
anticipation. Thus, along with loss of language, traumatized individuals
may also experience difficulties in the day-to-day navigation of life
that the rest of us handle unconsciously and automatically. This
inhibition of Broca's area is exacerbated by the amygdala's ability to
inhibit prefrontal functioning during high states of arousal. This may
be one of the reasons that traumatized individuals seem to experience
more than their share of accidents, bad relationships, and misfortune.
The combined loss of words and decreased predictive abilities enhance
the long-term impact of the trauma by increasing the probability of
ongoing stress and revictimization. The "talking cure" stimulates
language networks and encourages the creation of adaptive narratives
about traumatic experience. The therapist's caring presence,
availability, and skill promote a moderate state of arousal, which
supports the neuroplastic processes necessary for building descending
inhibitory fibers to limbic and brain stem centers. Putting feelings
into words minimizes the active inhibition of Broca's area and supports
the balance of right and left hemisphere processing. In therapy, we
stimulate Broca's area, disinhibit language, restore predictive
abilities, and support neuroplastic processes of adaptive learning.
Divergent Hemispheric Processing The mind is the last to know.
---Michael Gazzaniga Over the course of primate and human evolution, the
left and right cerebral cortices have become specialized to serve the
formation of the conscious, linguistic self in the left and the somatic,
emotional self in the right. It is likely that as the hemispheres
differentiated, it became increasingly

necessary for one to take executive control of conscious processing.
There is considerable evidence that the left hemisphere took on this
function, along with a lead role in maintaining moderate states of
arousal and social connectedness. The right hemisphere constantly
provides information to the left, but while we are awake, the left
hemisphere may or may not allow this input into consciousness. The
disruption of a proper integration and balance between left and right
hemisphere input can result in dominance of one hemisphere or the other.
As we have seen, the overinhibition of the right hemisphere by the left
can result in alexithymia, while an underinhibition can result in
overemotionality, magical thinking, or auditory hallucinations. The
proper integration and balance of the left and right prefrontal cortices
are also necessary for the regulation of mood. When people are
traumatized, there is an increased likelihood that the coordination
between left and right functioning will be disrupted. The PTSD symptoms
of intrusions are likely the clearest example of deficits of right
hemisphere infiltration of the left. When trauma occurs in early
development, the hemispheres grow to be less coordinated and integrated,
resulting in problems in affective regulation and positive social
awareness. People with histories of childhood abuse and neglect have
been shown to have a smaller corpus callosum and are more likely to
suffer from symptoms of PTSD (De Bellis et al., 1999; Teicher et al.,
2004). Their brains have fewer connecting fibers available to integrate
right and left processes, and their development is characterized by a
decreased lateral integration. As we have also seen, the left and right
prefrontal cortices are biased toward positive and negative emotions,
and a disturbance of the homeostatic balance of the two can result in
extremes of depression and mania. Therapists intuitively and
intentionally seek to balance the expression of affect and cognition. We
encourage overintellectualized and defended clients to be aware of and
explore their feelings. On the other hand, we provide clients who are
overwhelmed by anxiety, fear, or depression with tools to use the
cognitive capabilities of their left hemispheres to counterbalance these
emotions. The common imbalance between affect and cognition in many of
our clients rests, in part, in the struggle between the hemispheres to
integrate and learn a common language. The narratives we create in
therapy strive to be inclusive of the conscious and unconscious
realities of both hemispheres.

The Bias Toward Early Learning In the practical use of our intellect,
forgetting is as important as remembering. ---William James At birth,
the more primitive structures of our brains responsible for social and
emotional processing are highly developed, while the cortex develops
slowly through the first decades of life. Much of our most important
emotional and interpersonal learning occurs during our first few years
when our primitive brains are in control. We mature into self-awareness
having been programmed by early experience with sensory and emotional
assumptions that we accept as truth. As a result, a great deal of
extremely important learning takes place before we are consciously aware
we are learning (Casey, Galvan, & Hare, 2005). For most of us, the early
interactions that shape our brains remain forever inaccessible to
conscious memory, reflection, or modification. This artifact of
evolution, expressed in the sequential nature of our neural development,
turns the accidents of birth and the ups and downs of everyday life into
the beliefs and causes for which we suffer and die. Early experiences
shape structures in ways that have a lifelong impact on three of our
most vital areas of learning: attachment, emotional regulation, and
self-esteem. These three spheres of learning establish our abilities to
connect with others, cope with stress, and feel we are loveable and have
value. Given how little control we have over our early experience, and
that anyone can have children regardless of their competence or sanity,
an incredible amount of human brain building is left to chance. In
addition, we have seen that early experience shapes genetic expression,
which impacts our ability to learn, regulate our emotions, and nurture
our future children. It is obvious that our dependency on early
caretakers can influence us in perfectly terrible ways. We see this in
abused and neglected children who often enter adolescence and adulthood
with a variety of symptoms. Explosive anger, eating disorders, drug and
alcohol problems, and other forms of acting out are common. They also
have identity disturbances and a poor self-image, exacerbated by angry
feelings and antisocial behaviors. Like a veteran with PTSD, the brains
of these children become shaped to

survive the combat of their day-to-day lives, but are ill-equipped to
navigate peace. In psychotherapy, we have tools that allow us to explore
early experiences with the possibility of coming to understand our
symptoms as forms of sensory, motor, and emotional memory. Projection,
transference, self-esteem, and internal self-talk are all expressions of
early implicit memories from which we can get a view of early
unremembered interactions. Making the unconscious conscious is, in part,
coming to an awareness and understanding of the impact of early
experience. Once they can be consciously thought about and placed into a
coherent narrative, we gain the ability to reintegrate dissociated
neural networks of affect, cognition, abstract thinking, and bodily
awareness. This process opens the door to decreasing shame and
increasing self-compassion while creating the possibility for healing.
The Tenacity of Fear It is the perpetual dread of fear, the fear of
fear, that shapes the face of a brave man. ---Georges Bernanos At birth,
the amygdala, the executive center of our brain, is fully developed. Its
first job is to figure out who is safe and who is dangerous. Although
the amygdala begrudgingly comes to share executive control with the
prefrontal cortex, it remains capable of hijacking the brain in states
of distress and fear. The amygdala's job is to remember any and all
threats and to generalize these experiences to other signs of danger. In
other words, the amygdala never forgets. Its tendency to generalize is
why a panic attack outside the home can lead to agoraphobia or why
getting scratched by a cat can soon morph into a fear of all furry
animals. Evolution has shaped our brains to err on the side of caution
and be afraid whenever it might be remotely useful. In contrast, the
hippocampus is constantly remodeled in response to new information and
can easily differentiate one furry animal from another. Fear makes our
thinking and behavior more rigid. We become afraid of taking risks and
learning new things, which results in a tendency for those who are sick
to remain sick. One recognized symptom of trauma is

"neophobia" or the fear of anything new. Once our brains have been
shaped by fear to perceive, think, and act in stereotyped ways, we tend
to remain in rigid patterns that are reinforced by our very survival.
Our internal logic is self-perpetuating, making it difficult for us to
find answers that are different from the ones we already know. Our
chance of learning then rests in getting input from other people.
However, relationships with others are also difficult because fear may
make us keep them at arm's length. When people are hurt or afraid,
caring relationships are not easily entered into nor easy to benefit
from. Openness and trust are fragile creatures, even with the people we
love most. The training of the therapist and the therapeutic context are
designed to enhance support and trust, and provide consistent emotional
availability. Within the consulting room, therapists attempt to be
amygdala whisperers and work to reactivate networks of new learning in
the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Warmth, empathic caring, and
positive regard can create a state of mind that enhances neuroplastic
processes and increases the likelihood of positive change. It now
appears that therapists help people get over their fears, not by erasing
traumatic memories but by building new connections to inhibit these
memories from triggering autonomic arousal. The Damaging Effects of
Stress Hormones Man is an over-complicated organism. If he is doomed to
extinction he will die out for want of simplicity. ---Ezra Pound For our
more primitive cousins with smaller cortices and simpler environments,
danger is encountered and quickly resolved. They either escape or get
eaten, win or lose. But when you add a huge cortex capable of building
freeways and information superhighways, the brain has to adapt to a
world of constant challenge where there is never any clear resolution. A
large cortex also adds a memory for the future and endless possibilities
for anticipatory anxiety. Beyond this we now have a vast imagination
capable of creating frightening fantasies that our primitive brains are
unable to distinguish from reality. Stressful situations trigger the
release of the stress hormone cortisol. Stress hormones are catabolic,
which means they break down complex

compounds for immediate energy. Cortisol's motto is "live for today, for
tomorrow we may die." As one of the glucocorticoids, its job is to break
down complex carbohydrates into usable energy for our muscles. Another
action of cortisol is to cut down on energy dedicated to protein
synthesis. Because neural growth and our immune system depend on protein
synthesis, prolonged high levels of stress hormones impair our ability
both to learn and to remain healthy. The conservation of our primitive
stress system, well adapted for a simple life and a small cortex, can
leave our modern human brains bathed in high levels of stress hormones
for long periods of time. This leads to compromises of brain
maintenance, learning, and immunological functioning. Because chronic
stress inhibits learning, successful psychotherapy depends on our
ability to downregulate stress in our clients. From specific stress
reduction techniques to the soothing effects of a supportive
relationship, stress modulation and success in psychotherapy go hand in
hand. Thus, stress reduction skills should not be limited only to
specific diagnoses, because they are always necessary for psychotherapy
to be successful. The Speed and Amount of Unconscious Processing Man is
ready to die for an idea provided that idea is not quite clear to him.
---Paul Eldridge In order to survive, animals have to be tough or fast.
The tortoise and the hare are good examples of these different, but
equally viable survival strategies. While our elaborate cortices
separate our brains from theirs, further down, all three are pretty
similar. Our expanded cortex does allow us vast response flexibility
over our more primitive cousins. Of course, thinking through options
takes time and in some circumstances, a speedy reflex is far more
adaptive. Because of this, we have retained many primitive reflexes and
subcortical executive control of certain functions in the service of
survival. Our harelike brains allow us to make rapid decisions and have
knee-jerk responses. While it takes approximately 500--600 milliseconds
for an experience to register in conscious awareness, the amygdala can
react to a potential threat in less than 50 milliseconds. This means
that by the time we have become

consciously aware of an experience, it has already been processed many
times in our more primitive neural networks, activating memories and
triggering implicit memories organized by past learning. This
unconscious backdrop shapes the perception of what is being consciously
attended to and constructs our experiences of the present moment.
(Nomura et al., 2003; Wiens, 2006). When we finally become aware of the
outcome of this process, we experience it as if we are living in the
present, and act with free will based on conscious deliberation. There
is extensive evidence that this is not really the case. We actually live
about 500 milliseconds after the moment and our past learning severely
limits our free will. The illusions of free will and control have
obvious survival advantages, foremost of which is the ability to be
assertive and confident in complex situations. The downside of this
strategy is when we become so sure of our personal beliefs that we are
unable to consider alternatives. Ninety percent of the input to the
cerebral cortex comes from internal neural processing. This makes sense
for rapid appraisal and reflexive action based on past learning but also
results in cognitive distortions that can keep us frightened, withdrawn,
and confused. Think of the veteran years after combat, who ducks when he
hears a car backfire or runs for cover as a news helicopter flies
overhead. A person who experienced early abandonment may, as an adult,
be perfectly capable of starting new relationships. At a certain point,
however, intimacy may trigger implicit memories of insecure or
disorganized attachment, leading him to become frightened and flee from
a potentially healthy relationship (Koukkou & Lehmann, 2006). The
impulse to run, driven by implicit memories embedded in primitive brain
circuitry, can be overpowering and inescapable. The true reasons for
this behavior are so accurately described by Christopher Bollas (1987)
as the "unthought known." Openness to questioning one's assumptions,
especially when they are self-defeating and incorrect, is a key
predictor of positive outcome in psychotherapy. Once clients begin to
understand that what they assumed to be reality is actually a personal
fabrication, they either flee or become fascinated. We attempt to get
them to question their thoughts, beliefs, and assumptions and to "act
in," that is, to come to sessions and talk about their impulses with the
hope of integrating inhibitory cortical input with primitive memories,
emotions, and urges. Attachment schemas, transference, and self-esteem
are all examples of implicit memories that

shape and distort conscious awareness. These very patterns of
unconscious processing led Freud to develop psychoanalysis and to create
a therapeutic context that supported an exploration of the unconscious.
Psychotherapy encourages being skeptical of the perceived realities of
our brains. Given how our brains work, this is a sound strategy, one we
share with research scientists and Buddhist monks. The Primacy of
Projection It is easy to spot an informed man---his opinions are just
like your own. ---Miguel De Unamuno Human brains possess complex social
networks which become activated as we observe and interact with those
around us (Cozolino, 2006). Hours after birth, we begin to focus on and
imitate the facial expressions of our caretakers. Mirror neurons begin
to link observations and actions, allowing us to (a) learn from others
by watching them, (b) anticipate and predict actions, and (c) activate
emotional states supportive of emotional resonance and empathy. We also
possess neural circuits that automatically analyze the actions and
gestures of others, generating a theory of their mind---what they know,
what their motivations may be, and what they might do next. As with
mirror neurons, having an automatic theory of what is on the mind of
another allows us to predict behavior to ensure our own individual
safety while supporting group cohesion and the spread of culture. The
existence of these sophisticated social neural systems reflects the
millions of years of natural selection that have been refining our
brain's ability to read the emotions, thoughts, and intentions of
others. All of this attention to others clearly shows us the importance
of social information processing to our very survival. As a result, we
are quick to think we know others because mind reading is instantaneous
and obligatory. In biblical terms, it is a reflexive habit of the social
brain to attend to the mote in our brother's eye and not to the beam in
our own. Unfortunately, evolution has not seen fit to invest much neural
circuitry into self-awareness. Projection is automatic and lessens
anxiety while self-awareness requires effort and generates
anxiety---which do you think is going to be the norm?

Given that we use our internal expressions as implicit models for how we
understand others, it could be that what Freud called the defense
mechanism of projection is actually a simple byproduct of how our brains
interweave our automatic theories of others' minds with understandings
of ourselves. This may be why we often discover our own truths in what
we think and feel about others. And since our individual identities
emerge from dyads, perhaps the separation of self and other is always a
dicey distinction, one that many cultures do not even bother with. This
may also be why selfanalysis is generally not successful because the
logic of self-inquiry is so interwoven with our implicit assumptions.
The most naive observer can see many things about us that we cannot see
in ourselves. In close relationships, we provide each other with another
set of eyes outside of our bodies that can reflect our lives to us in
ways that are impossible to perceive on our own. In therapy, we teach
our clients to ask themselves if the pot is calling the kettle black:
that is, are their thoughts and feelings about others autobiographical?
While in couples therapy, we encourage our clients to stop mind reading
and learn to actually ask their partners what is on their minds. We
engage in a parallel process whenever we explore how much of our
reaction to a client is countertransferential. In our training as
therapists, we learn to question our judgment and assumptions in light
of our own personal histories. We also learn to use mirror neurons and
theory of mind to enhance our attunement with our clients and explore
their inner worlds. Taking back our projections and working with
transference and countertransference in therapy allows us to use our
thoughts about others as potential sources of personal information.
Unconscious Self-Deception Men use thoughts to justify their
wrongdoings, and speech only to conceal their thoughts. ---Voltaire
Based both on neural architecture and everyday experience, self-insight
does not appear to have exerted a strong pressure on natural selection.
In fact, it may have been selected against because real self-knowledge
creates the risk of doubt, hesitation, and demoralization. Defenses that
distort our

reality can help us by decreasing anxiety, shame, and depression. At the
same time they can enhance social coherence by putting a positive spin
on the behavior of those closest to us. This is most clearly seen in a
mother's love. A wise judge once said that everyone he sends to prison
has "a mother with an innocent child." Self-deception not only decreases
anxiety, it also increases the likelihood of successfully deceiving
others. If we believe our own confabulations, we are less likely to give
away our real thoughts and intentions via nonverbal signs and behaviors.
Reaction formation, or behaviors and feelings that are opposite of our
true desires, is also quite effective. Freud's defense mechanisms and
the attributional biases of social psychology document an array of these
distortions. Secure attachment and ego strength are correlated with our
ability to hear feedback, accept our own limitations, and use less
reality-distorting defenses---humor instead of repression and
sublimation instead of denial. In psychodynamic psychotherapy, we
provide our clients not only with interpretations, clarifications, and
reflections but also with an alternative perspective (our own) that they
can utilize to help discover themselves. Both client and therapist need
to engage in reality testing, although the definition of reality can be
slippery. This is why our own personal therapy is so important to our
clients. In today's large social groups, self-awareness has become
increasingly important for survival of the species, perhaps as important
as self-deception is to the survival of the individual. Distorting
reality to reduce one's anxiety may allow the rich to get richer and the
righteous to feel justified, but in the long term there are consequences
to the environment and social systems that have negative impacts on us
all. These ways in which the brain and mind have evolved have created a
wide variety of threats to our emotional and physical well-being. I
suspect that you have recognized many of your clients' problems in these
discussions, and perhaps some of your own. These legacies of evolution
make both clients and therapists vulnerable to dissociation and distress
and lead us to a common search for solutions. Let's take a look at a
case study where we can examine how these vulnerabilities can play out
in life and in therapy. Patrick Man is born broken. He lives by mending.

---Eugene O'Neill Patrick, a man in his mid-30s, came to therapy with
the complaint that his life was "unraveling." Talkative and obviously
bright, Patrick was the kind of person who could quickly launch into
animated conversation. I felt immediately drawn into his stories and
found our sessions interesting and enjoyable. I soon learned that he had
grown up on the Connecticut coast, that his father was a fisherman with
a "drinking problem," and that both his parents had died a few years
earlier. A recent physical altercation during a relationship breakup
triggered him to take stock of his life. "That's just not me," he said.
"Something's very wrong." Over our first few sessions, two things stood
out to me; he lived under a great deal of emotional pressure and alcohol
was a pervasive presence in his current life. Patrick's initial interest
was to understand what had happened in his last relationship and during
the breakup. Although he had the sense that some broader issues lay
beneath the surface, he was unable to articulate what they might be.
"That's your job," he told me with a smile. It was clear from our
discussions that alcohol had been a part of Patrick's life from the
beginning. His father's alcoholism had many negative effects on him and
everyone in his family. Both Patrick and his ex-girlfriend drank heavily
and alcohol was always present during their disputes. It became very
clear that both Patrick and his father used alcohol to cope with
anxiety, sadness, and loss. What turned out to be my first important
intervention was a matter-offact question about whether he felt he had a
drinking problem. Given his father's addiction and all he had told me
about his lifelong relationship with drinking, I expected to hear a
"Duh!" and some sympathy for being so slow witted. Instead, Patrick was
surprised and taken aback by my question. It seemed that he had never
given any serious thought to being an alcoholic himself. At first, I was
surprised by his surprise, and impressed by his brain's ability to
compartmentalize different aspects of awareness. The power and
persuasiveness of his early learning to normalize alcohol and deny
emotions created a dissociation enabling him to be unaware of the
proverbial elephant in the room. Instead of being defensive, he began
discussing his relationship with alcohol like an investigator looking
for clues to a crime. He spontaneously shared that many difficulties in
his relationships seemed to occur while drinking. Patrick could see that
he used alcohol to deaden his emotions and

that it caused him difficulties in school, at work, and in all of his
relationships. As he listened to the unfolding of his own narrative, he
gradually became aware of the fact that he shared his father's
addiction. By the expressions on his face, it was clear that he was
learning about himself by listening to his story---a story he had lived
but never thought about. The role of alcohol in his father's life was
clear but it never occurred to him to apply these insights to himself.
Patrick was in the process of using language to integrate networks of
emotion and thought, and reevaluating past experiences from a
perspective of expanded self-awareness. Once the reality of his own
alcoholism was firmly established in conscious thought, he asked me what
I thought he should do. Again expecting a "Duh!" I said, "Well, you
could stop drinking, join Alcoholics Anonymous, and try working the
steps." And again, Patrick reacted as if this were a novel idea that he
might try out. Based on past experience, my expectation was that we
would be working through his resistance for quite a while before he
would give AA a try. But, true to his word, he stopped drinking, got
involved in AA, found a sponsor, and worked the steps. (Note to
beginning therapists---this sort of thing almost never happens.) The
openness, enthusiasm, and rapidity with which Patrick gained awareness,
explored, and tackled the issue made me wonder what his life would have
been like with even a modicum of insightful parental guidance. His
obvious intelligence and drive could have been applied to all kinds of
challenges had he only been taught a language for his feelings, learned
to be selfaware, or applied his problem-solving skills to his own life.
His early chronic stress, combined with the family silence and shame,
led him to inhibit language and conscious awareness. Like many children
of alcoholics, Patrick was great at giving advice to others while
remaining a complete mystery to himself. His father's drinking,
financial difficulties in the family, and problems with his siblings
always took precedence over his personal needs. There was almost no time
spent during his childhood on helping him learn how to cope with
negative emotions---a learned and not innate ability. Like so many, he
grew up alone, surrounded by friends and family, with only the ability
to act out his inner emotional turmoil. His chaotic inner emotional
world as well as his coping strategies and defensive styles were set
early in life and held on into adulthood. The fear of both his internal
chaos and of confronting it kept him drinking and running for decades.

Once sober, the emotions and defenses behind his addiction began to
emerge. With the help of AA he learned about the typical struggles and
pitfalls of alcoholism. These meetings eventually led him to explore the
principles of Adult Children of Alcoholics (ACA), which proved to be of
even more importance to him than the impact of his own drinking. Over
the following months, his impulsivity and impatience, pathological
caretaking of others, and inability to navigate negative emotions became
the focus of therapy. Situation by situation, we deconstructed his
assumptions and searched for new ways of thinking, feeling, and
behaving. In essence, we were doing the work that should occur in
childhood during countless interactions with parents. The tenacity of
fear is impressive, causing many of us to spend a lifetime avoiding the
pain and confusion of childhood. During our sessions, Patrick mentioned
his work in the New York financial district during 2001. For some
reason, I had never thought to ask him how the terrorist attacks of 9/11
impacted him and, similarly, he never brought it up. When I asked if and
how he was affected, he offhandedly mentioned that he lost many friends
but didn't think he had suffered any ill effects. His tone of voice
sounded hauntingly similar to when he described his early family life so
I asked him to tell me about his experience and in response he told me
the following story: I was living in New Jersey at the time and commuted
to Wall Street via ferry across the Hudson. I overslept that morning, so
instead of being at work at 8:30, I was still crossing the river at 9.
Halfway across, some of us noticed smoke rising from downtown. People
began gathering at the front of the ship to see what looked like a fire
near the Trade Center. Minutes later, a southbound plane tracking the
Hudson passed low overhead. We all watched as it passed over the Statue
of Liberty, banked hard left, and headed back toward Manhattan. As the
second plane hit we were close enough to the docks to see people running
through the park. The concussion shock from the explosion made everyone
move forward and back in a surreal way, like blades of grass in the
wind. When the plane hit the second tower, we knew we were under attack.
I was enraged and anxious to reach the dock to see what I could do to
help. I remembered my

father talking about Pearl Harbor and how he and his friends stood in
line at the recruiting office the next morning. As we approached the
dock, the crowds rushed forward to escape the carnage and chaos behind
them. But just before we reached the dock, the ferry slowed and reversed
direction to avoid being swamped by the massive crowd. As we headed back
to New Jersey, I began thinking about the people I knew who worked in
the Trade Center and imagined what it would be like to be in those
buildings as they burned. I remember feeling numb as I stared at the
huge plume of smoke rising above the city. When we got back to Jersey we
all stood in the terminal watching the television as the buildings
collapsed, first one and then the other. Some of the women cried and
even some men; we stood there in shock, leaning against one another for
support. The phones were down and there was nothing I could do but
imagine where my friends were and if they had survived. Once I arrived
back home, I couldn't take my eyes off the television. From time to time
I would see someone I knew, dazed and covered with dust, staggering past
the camera. I eventually noticed that it had grown dark and I was
hungry. I was able to connect with my girlfriend later that night, and
the next day we drove south in a sort of waking coma. Eventually we
found a hotel room and got drunk for a few days. Both Patrick's reaction
to the impact of 9/11 and his own alcoholism were processed in a
disassociated manner. This defense paralleled how he dealt with his
experiences and feelings from childhood. Early in life he learned to
stay away from his emotions through denial, hypomanic activity, and
combative sports. Drinking, working, and socializing had all become
compulsive ways of avoiding or inhibiting his feelings. His intellect
allowed him to succeed in the workplace and rationalize his unhealthy
behaviors. But upon awakening each day, he discovered the same sad,
frightening, and lonely world. The many negative effects of having an
alcoholic parent are well known. The fear and uncertainty created by the
alternating presence and absence of the alcoholic combined with an
increased probability of extreme emotional reactions can have a
devastating impact on all aspects of

development. These children often learn not to be needy as they develop
a false self to take care of the parent and maintain the artifice of a
happy home. Unfortunately, they never receive the help they need to
articulate their experiences and develop a comforting inner world. Their
early terror persists in networks of implicit memory but they lack
mechanisms for expression or social connection that could heal them.
Thus, they recreate the chaos from which they are so desperately trying
to escape by acting out their emotions while establishing relationships
with abusive or empty others. At first it was difficult for Patrick to
focus on his own feelings and personal issues. His initial attention
kept returning to the problems, shortcomings, and limitations of his
girlfriend. It was only after he became less agitated and more
self-reflective that he could see that he and his girlfriend shared many
of the same problems. Like most of us, he found it easier to focus on
her problems rather than his own. His gradual improvement required that
he reorient his focus onto his own behaviors and feelings. Next Patrick
had to develop a language with which to describe and share his inner
world. And finally, over and over again, he had to experience his life
from the inside out, and learn to connect with others as another human
being rather than a caretaker or raging alcoholic. Summary The
sophistication of the human brain reflects millions of years of
evolutionary adaptation where old structures were conserved and modified
while new structures emerged and expanded. Countless interactive
networks and design compromises created fertile ground for the
disruption of smooth integration of neural systems. The very complexity
of the development and functioning of the brain is also what makes it
such a fragile structure. Assuming that the trillions of components
arrive in their proper places and work according to their genetic
templates, there are a host of other challenges to integrated
psychological functioning. The discontinuity of conscious and
unconscious processes, multiple memory systems, differences between the
hemispheres, hidden processing layers, and multiple executive structures
are all potential sources of dissociation and dysregulation. Disruption
in the coordination and homeostatic balance

of these neural systems is the neurobiological substrate of
psychological distress and mental illness. Evolution is driven by the
physical survival of the species and thus, much of the brain's
functioning is centered around automatic fight-or-flight mechanisms as
opposed to conscious and compassionate decision making. Because of this,
the conscious and unconscious management of fear and anxiety is a core
component of our personalities, attachment relationships, and
identities. The considerable degree of postnatal brain development and
the disproportionate emphasis on early childhood experiences in the
sculpting of the brain add to our vulnerability to psychological
distress. Psychotherapists are trained to use their social brains as a
tool to connect to and modify the brains of their clients. Through
interpersonal neurobiological processes, therapists serve as an external
regulatory circuit to help reestablish the optimal flow of energy and
information. This is done for the circuits within and among the cerebral
hemispheres, and through all levels of the neuraxis from the primitive
lower regions to the most recently evolved components of the neocortex.
It is through this increased integration that more optimal mental
processing is established and symptoms are replaced with functional
behavior. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 17

Teaching Old Dogs New Tricks: Stimulating Neural Plasticity It is not
the strongest of the species that survive, not the most intelligent, but
the one most responsive to change. ---Charles Darwin Psychotherapy has
survived for more than 100 years in the absence of an accepted
brain-based model of change. The old view of the brain as a
predetermined and static entity necessitated that the development of
psychotherapy be independent from the biological sciences of even 20
years ago. Fortunately, current neuroscientific findings do not support
neurological fatalism but find a brain capable of constantly adapting to
new challenges. In fact, therapists have learned to utilize attachment,
emotional attunement, and narratives as tools to modify the brain.
Therapists often lament the fact that parents don't do a better job
during their children's early development, when relationships have such
a powerful impact on their brains. But if we approach the brain from the
perspective of ongoing plasticity, what are we capable of in our
consulting rooms? How plastic is the brain? Can plasticity be enhanced,
and how much of an effect can the therapeutic relationship have on the
brain? These questions are central to psychotherapy, because we rely on
the brain's ability to change well after traditional sensitive periods
have passed. Research on imprinting of parental figures in geese
(Lorenz, 1991) and the importance of periods of visual exposure in the
development of the occipital lobes in cats (Hubel & Wiesel, 1962) have
been standard fare in undergraduate education and popular science for
half a century. Unfortunately, these studies have created the impression
that the timing of brain growth is entirely predetermined by template
genetics (DNA) and that early experiences become indelibly etched into
our neural architecture

(Rutter & Rutter, 1993). Extracting the concepts of imprinting and
critical periods from ethology and applying them to human development
turns out to be quite misleading (Michel & Moore, 1995). We now know
that genetic expression is controlled by experiences throughout life,
and that changes in the environment, both good and bad, continue to have
positive and negative effects on us. Also, our brains are more complex
and expanded in regions that maintain more neuroplastic properties.
Thus, learning in humans is far more complex and flexible than the
original conceptions of imprinting and critical periods led scientists
to believe (Hensch, 2004). Recall that sensitive periods are times of
exuberant growth in neural networks, corresponding with the rapid
development of the skills and abilities to which they are dedicated
(Chugani, 1998; Fischer, 1987). Although there is no doubt that these
periods exist, what is in question is the indelibility of learning
during these times, as well as the possibilities of modifying when they
occur during development. As neuroscience finds more examples of
neurogenesis and neuroplasticity, and epigenetic programming taking
place in mature brains, there is an increasing recognition that we
retain different kinds of neural plasticity throughout life ( Bornstein,
1989). The research on neural plasticity has historically focused on the
brain's ability to adapt after early brain injury (Goldman, 1971;
Goldman & Galkin, 1978; Henry et al., 1984). Today, plasticity is
understood to be a basic principle of healthy brains at any age. Rather
than lacking plasticity, the adult brain is now seen as having an
increased tendency toward neural stabilization while retaining the
ability for new learning. There also appears to be a shift in how
information is processed in a manner more appropriate to different
stages of life, which is another aspect of its plastic reorganization
(Cozolino, 2008; Stiles, 2000). This vital shift in perspective has led
to a rapid expansion of interest in and exploration of the
neurobiological mechanisms of lifetime learning and change (Rosenzweig,
2001). Use-Dependent Plasticity Education is not a preparation for life;
education is life itself. ---John Dewey

You will remember that changes in synaptic strength in response to an
inner or outer stimulus are believed to be the basis for learning. The
process of long-term potentiation (LTP) prolongs excitation of cell
assemblies that are synchronized and interconnected in their firing
patterns (Hebb, 1949). This is only a small piece of a vastly complex
set of mechanisms and interactions shaping the connection, timing, and
organization of the firing between the billions of individual neurons
woven into neural networks. Plasticity reflects the ability of neurons
to change the way they relate to one another as they adapt to changing
environmental demands (Buonomano & Merzenich, 1998). This can occur in
the modulation of signal transmission across synapses, changes in the
organization of local neural circuits, and in the relationship between
different functional neural networks (Trojan & Pokorny, 1999). It has
been demonstrated that portions of the cortex involved in sensory and
motor functions reorganize in response to changing uses, after injury,
and during skill learning (Braun et al., 2000; Elbert et al., 1994;
Karni et al., 1995). Violinists have larger cortical representations in
areas dedicated to the fingers of the left hand than do non-string
players (Elbert et al., 1995), Braille readers demonstrate similar
patterns of cortical plasticity in sensory regions (Sterr et al., 1998a,
1998b); and cab drivers have larger hippocampi incorporating more
visualspatial knowledge (Maguire et al., 2006). These and other studies
have demonstrated use-dependent plasticity in both cortical and
subcortical regions. Because of their early maturation and organization,
sensory-motor areas have been thought to have the earliest sensitive
periods and the most permanent neural organization. The extensive
plasticity discovered in these regions suggests that executive and
association areas of the frontal cortex (which are characterized by
their adaptation to change) should demonstrate even more synaptogenesis,
altered synaptic connections, and potentially neurogenesis (Beatty,
2001; Dalla, Bangasser, Edgecomb, & Shors, 2007; Gould, Reeves,
Graziano, et al., 1999; Hodge & Boakye, 2001; Mateer & Kerns, 2000). In
fact, research has found a continual increase in white matter volume in
the frontal and temporal lobes of males well into the fifth decade of
life (Bartzokis et al., 2001). The activation and organization of the
cortex appears capable of continual change, with expansion and
contraction of cortical representation alternating with varying amounts
of stimulation and deprivation (Polley,

Chen-Bee, & Frostig, 1999). In other words, the brain is capable of more
and faster functional reorganization than previously thought
(Ramachandran, Rogers-Ramachandran, & Stewart, 1992). Our ability to
learn new skills and information throughout life is clear evidence for
ongoing neural plasticity. The study of the speed, degree, and nature of
neural plasticity is a vast new scientific frontier, and the potential
to enhance plasticity has profound implications for neurosurgery,
education, neurorehabilitation, and psychotherapy (Classen, Liepert,
Wise, Hallett, & Cohen, 1998; Johansson, 2000). Enhancing Plasticity
Life is growth. If we stop growing, technically and spiritually, we are
as good as dead. ---Morihei Ueshiba As we learn more about the
biological mechanisms of sensitive periods, the possibility of
controlling them begins to emerge (Moriceau & Sullivan, 2004). What if
neuroscientists could learn how to reinstate sensitive periods in adults
during psychotherapy? Huang and his colleagues (1999) found that the
sensitive period of the visual cortex was accelerated in certain
genetically altered mice. It turns out that a genetic variation in these
mice results in the earlier secretion of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF), a neural growth hormone. Could BDNF reestablish sensitive
periods and be used to stimulate more exuberant learning at any time
during life? Kang and Schuman (1995) found that BDNF and NT-3 (another
neurotrophic factor) enhanced LTP activity when introduced to the
hippocampus of an adult rat. In a related study, it was found that a
strain of mice with higher levels of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors had enhanced performance in learning and memory tasks (Tang et
al., 1999). NMDA, a neurotransmitter involved in the formation of
associations among neurons, is necessary for cortical reorganization,
and has the ability to specify certain transcriptional processes related
to neural plasticity (Jablonska et al., 1999; Rao & Finkbeiner, 2007;
Wanisch, Tang, Mederer, & Wotjak, 2005). NMDA receptors have also been
shown to be necessary for the initiation of LTP in monkeys (Myers et
al., 2000).

This work has led to the suggestion that the use of D-cycloserine, which
enhances the activation of NMDA receptors, may boost the effect of some
forms of psychotherapy. One study showed an improved effect of exposure
therapy with phobic individuals after using D-cycloserine (Ressler et
al., 2004). The effects of cholinergic stimulation suggest it also plays
a role in neural plasticity by activating neural growth hormones (Cowan
& Kandel, 2001; Zhu & Waite, 1998). Future research with these
biological subcomponents of learning and memory may lead to
pharmacological interventions that could enhance the brain's ability to
learn while taking piano lessons, preparing for the GREs, or during
certain critical phases of psychotherapy (Davis, Myers, Chhatwal, &
Ressler, 2006). Just a few years ago, the conventional wisdom in
neuroscience was that we were born with all the neurons we would ever
have. More recent research has found an increasing number of areas
within the brain where new neurons are generated. Stem cells, the basic
structure for many types of cells that are capable of renewing
themselves indefinitely, have so far been found in the olfactory bulb
and a portion of the hippocampus called the dentate gyrus (Jacobs et
al., 2000). When the biological processes that stimulate stem cells are
understood, neurosurgeons may be able to trigger the growth of new
tissue in damaged areas (Hodge & Boakye, 2001). The underlying
biochemistry of the processes of neuronal growth is also being
investigated and may someday be utilized to enhance and support
plasticity (Akaneya, Tsumoto, Kinoshita, & Hatanaka, 1997; Barde, 1989)
and treat neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's diseases (Carswell, 1993). The acceleration or
reestablishment of sensitive periods, the enhancement of learning and
memory via biochemical adjustments, and the cultivation of new cells all
suggest the future possibility of intentional and strategic enhancement
of neural plasticity. While these potential biological interventions are
causes for hope, we are currently capable of enhancing plasticity
through our day-to-day behaviors and interactions. Enriched Environments
and Stimulating Lives Intellectual growth should commence at birth and
cease only at death. ---Albert Einstein

It has been known for decades that enriched and stimulating early
environments can have a positive and long-term impact on both neural
architecture and neurochemistry. Research has demonstrated that when
rats are raised in complex and challenging environments, they show
advances in many aspects of brain building (see Table 17.1). An
enriching environment enables mammals to build larger, more complex, and
more resilient brains. TABLE 17.1 The Impact of Enriched Environments in
Experimental Animals Increases In Weight and thickness of cortex1 Weight
and thickness of hippocampi2 Length of neuronal dendrites3 Synapses
among neurons4 Activity of glial cells5 Levels of neural growth
hormones6 Levels of neurotransmitters7 Level of vascular activity8 Level
of metabolism9 Amount of gene expression10 Levels of nerve growth
factor11 The effects of the environment in stimulating brain growth are
so robust that it occurs even in situations of malnutrition. If rats are
malnourished but placed in enriched environments, they will have heavier
brains than wellfed but less-stimulated rats. These findings exist
despite the fact that the malnourished rats weigh significantly less
(Bhide & Bedi, 1982). Although nutritional and environmental deprivation
often go hand in hand, some deficits may be reversed in adulthood.
Placing adult rats in enriched environments enhances synaptic plasticity
and ameliorates the effects of earlier nervous system damage and
genetically based learning deficits

(Altman, Wallace, Anderson, & Das, 1968; Kolb & Gibb, 1991; Maccari et
al., 1995; Morley-Fletcher, Rea, Maccari, & Laviola, 2003; Schrott et
al., 1992; Schrott, 1997). Although controlled studies of nutritional
and environmental deprivation are not possible with humans, some
naturally occurring situations offer similar insights into the power of
environmental enrichment. A study of Korean children adopted by families
in the United States found that environmental enrichment counteracted
their early malnutrition and deprivation. On measures of height and
weight, these children eventually surpassed Korean averages, while their
IQ scores reached or exceeded averages for American children (Winick,
Katchadurian, & Harris, 1975). In a different study of postmortem brain
samples of older adults, a consistent relationship was found between the
length of dendrites in Wernicke's area and the subjects' level of
education (Jacobs et al., 1993). It has also been suggested that an
enriched environment may improve poststroke recovery in humans (Ulrich,
1984). The theory of cognitive reserve, which arose from these
observations, has triggered research comparing the brains and cognitive
functioning in later life of people with varying levels of challenge and
stimulation. The cognitive reserve hypothesis suggests that stimulating
lives build more neural material, and the more you build, the more you
can afford to lose and still function in a competent manner later in
life (Richards & Deary, 2005; Stern, Alexander, Prohovnik, & Mayeux,
1992). A number of these studies support the idea that those who have
had more education and challenging occupations tend to have brains that
age better and resist the onset and progression of dementia. It is
believed that the cognitive declines associated with normal aging are
related to the gradual degeneration of dendrites, neurons, and the
biochemical mechanisms that support neural health and plasticity
(Jacobs, Driscoll, & Schall, 1997; Morrison & Hof, 2003). People with
more cognitive reserve typically have had better diets, higher quality
educations, and more intellectually challenging jobs than those with
lower reserve (Stern et al., 2005; Whalley, Deary, Appleton, & Starr,
2004). Factors like larger brain size, early learning, and greater
occupational attainment are associated with greater cognitive reserve
and seem to mitigate the effects of Alzheimer's disease, traumatic
injury, and the general impact of brain aging (Compton, Bachman, Brand,
& Avet, 2000; Kessler et al., 2003; Scarmeas

et al., 2004; Schmand et al., 1997; Staff, Murray, Deary, & Whalley,
2004; Stern et al., 1995). Skills most dependent upon frontal
functions---such as verbal fluency, controlled processing, and the
abstract thinking demanded by highcomplexity occupations---appear to
contribute most to cognitive reserve( Ardila, Ostrosky-Solis, Rosselli,
& Gomez, 2000; Le Carret et al., 2003). So, while being a college
professor does not protect against cognitive decline, fortunately for
me, it may slow down some of its manifestations (Christensen, Henderson,
Griffiths, & Levings, 1997). About 25% of older individuals showing no
symptoms of Alzheimer's disease while alive show significant
Alzheimer's-related brain pathology upon autopsy (Ince, 2001; Katzman et
al., 1989). Those with more education had a significantly greater amount
of plaques and tangles yet functioned as well as others with less
advanced disease (Alexander et al., 1997). This suggests that
individuals with more education can sustain a greater amount of neural
damage, and still maintain the same level of cognitive functioning as
those with less education. Studies have also found that expected
age-related intellectual decline can be halted or reversed in many older
adults by increasing environmental and social stimulation (Schaie &
Willis, 1986). The most probable explanation would be that these
experiences correlate with biological processes that enhance plasticity,
creating more elaborate, complex, and flexible brains. Given that
psychotherapy is an enriched environment for social-emotional learning,
we can assume that the challenges we provide our clients build more
complex and resilient brains. Research has yet to explore the
possibilities of enhanced longevity and brain health in those who engage
in psychotherapy. Moderate States of Arousal I am always doing that
which I cannot do, in order that I may learn how to do it. ---Pablo
Picasso Something we do in all forms of psychotherapy that enhances
neural plasticity is pay attention to creating moderate states of
arousal in our clients. Regulating subjective units of distress in
systematic desensitization,

balancing confrontation and empathic attunement in psychoanalysis, or
crafting the "safe emergency" of Gestalt therapy all reflect an
appreciation for the delicate balance between challenge and support. We
intuitively understand that people need to be motivated and aroused to
learn, while simultaneously free from the autonomic activation that
shuts down cortical plasticity. Knowing how to find and keep clients in
learning's sweet spot is a vital element of the art of psychotherapy.
The nontechnical story goes something like this: When all is well and we
are in a state of calm, there is no reason to learn anything new. When
our needs for food, companionship, and safety are satisfied, the brain
has done its job and there is no reason to invest energy in learning. At
the other extreme, states of high arousal and danger are no time for new
cortical learning but a call for immediate limbic action. A state of
mind somewhere between the two appears optimal for new learning and
problem solving (Anderson, 1976). An attitude best described as
interest, enthusiasm, or curiosity is thought to stimulate positive
arousal. In secure attachment, the child is able to use the parent as a
safe haven and avoid experiencing autonomic activation in response to
stress. A similar process is likely to take place in a secure
therapeutic alliance, allowing clients to verbalize their experience
rather than defending themselves or fleeing from the situation. The
formalization of this notion in experimental psychology, described in a
classic paper by Robert Yerkes and John Dodson (1908), came to be known
as the inverted-U learning curve. Contrary to expectation, they found
that mice learned to avoid a moderate shock faster than one of high or
low intensity. They charted their finding on a graph with arousal on the
x-axis and learning (performance) on the y-axis (see Figure 17.1). Over
the years this same phenomenon was found across species in a variety of
learning tasks (Broadhurst, 1957; Stennet, 1957). While this research
took place before we knew anything about the neurochemistry of learning,
it makes sense that this same inverted-U pattern will be reflected in
the underlying neurobiological processes of learning (Baldi &
Bucherelli, 2005). We now know that learning depends on building new
dendritic structures, and on the ability of these structures to
interconnect. Building dendrites is dependent on the synthesis of
proteins guided by genetic transcription, while neuronal firing shapes
the architecture of these dendrites to encode new learning. Not
surprisingly, the hormones secreted

by the HPA axis in response to stress (cortisol, norepinephrine, and
endorphins), as well as other learning mechanisms (NMDA receptors, BDNF
secretion, etc.), modulate learning on the same inverted U-shaped curve
(Hardingham & Bading, 2003; Parsons, Stöffler, & Danysz, 2007). At
moderate states of arousal, amygdala activation opens windows of
modulated stimulation where top-down plasticity is facilitated (Popescu,
Saghyan, & Paré, 2007). At moderate levels of arousal, these and many
more systems enhance learning, while at high and low levels they inhibit
new learning, in this same inverted-U pattern. FIGURE 17.1 The
Inverted-U Learning Curve

Hippocampal neurons require low levels of cortisol for structural
maintenance, while higher levels of cortisol inhibit their neuroplastic
properties (Gould, Woolley, & McEwen, 1990). Cortisol impacts learning
and plasticity by regulating the protein synthesis required for
dendritic growth and patterns of neural connectivity such as LTP, LTD,
and primed burst potentiation (a low-threshold version of LTP) in this
same pattern (Diamond, Bennett, Fleshner, & Rose, 1992; Domes et al.,
2005; Lupien & McEwen, 1997; Roozendaal, 2000). High levels of stress
also trigger endorphin release, which impedes both protein synthesis and
the consolidation of explicit memory (Introini-Collison & McGaugh,
1987). See Table 17.2 for a sample of findings supporting this pattern
of the biochemistry of arousal and its effects on learning.

Overall, the various neural systems dedicated to learning and arousal
are tightly interwoven. They work together to activate plasticity and
learning when it is needed to adapt to challenge, and turn it off in the
absence of challenge or when the body needs to be mobilized for
immediate survival. The inverted-U learning curve reflects both the
underlying neurobiological processes and the many overt manifestations
of learning seen in the laboratory, classroom, and consulting office. By
understanding these principles, we can use them to optimize neural
plasticity in the service of positive brain change. TABLE 17.2 The
Inverted-U Curve of Learning and Arousal mRNA expression1 Cortisol
levels Verbal memory2 Social memory3 Spatial memory4 Hip prime burst
potentials5 Long-term potentiation6 Norepinephrine levels Olfactory
plasticity7 Endorphin levels Protein synthesis and memory consolidation8

Attachment Plasticity Organic matter, especially nervous tissue, seems
endowed with a very extraordinary degree of plasticity. ---William James
Attachment in infancy is usually conceptualized as relationship
specific, while attachment in adulthood is thought of as a general
aspect of character.

Early attachment patterns may become generalized and self-perpetuating
because of their impact on our neurobiology, our ability to regulate our
emotions, and the expectations we have of ourselves, others, and the
world. The sensory, emotional, and behavioral systems influenced by
early attachment experiences can shape our brains in ways that make the
past a model for creating the future. We have learned a great deal from
attachment research: how our primitive bonding instincts regulate
anxiety, how categories of attachment reflect a parent's behavior and a
child's reaction to stress, and how attachment schemas are carried into
adulthood, affecting our choice of partners, the nature of our
relationships, and the way we parent our own children. The enthusiasm we
have about the power of attachment categories to explain emotional
development often fails to acknowledge the considerable fluctuation of
attachment styles over time. In our search for a straightforward
explanation of intimate human relationships, it is easy to overlook the
instability of attachment. In an attempt to support the predictive power
of attachment schemas, fluctuation and change are attributed to
measurement problems or uncontrolled external variables such as positive
and negative life events or changing relationships. But we seldom
consider that an attachment schema should change because we think of it
as a personality trait. As we saw in the animal research, maternal
attention to rat pups was mediated by the environment in ways that made
the pups a better fit to the environment to which the mother was
responding. Perhaps because our brains are so much more complex, it
takes greater effort and time for us to change, but the role of
attachment may be essentially the same in humans. In human subjects, we
see that a decrease in security or the maintenance of insecurity during
adolescence is more likely to occur in the presence of psychological,
familial, or environmental stressors. Adolescents who see their mothers
as supportive are more likely to gain security, while maternal
depression correlates with a shift from secure to insecure attachment
(Allen et al., 2004; Hamilton, 2000; Weinfield, Sroufe, & Egeland,
2000). Overall secure attachment, while not impervious, appears more
resistant to change than insecure attachment, while negative life events
operate to maintain insecure attachment (Hamilton, 2000; Kirkpatrick &
Davis, 1994; Thompson, 1982). These findings certainly parallel the
animal literature. The major implication for psychotherapy from all of
these findings is that

insecure attachment is subject to change as a result of positive social
input (Pilowsky et al., 2008). As shown in Table 17.3, the consistency
of attachment ratings, primarily secure versus insecure, is 24--64%
depending on the study. This may be bad news for those interested in
attachment as a stable trait, but good news for those of us in the
business of change. As a psychotherapist who is very interested in
positive change, the messiness of the attachment construct and the
variability of the data come as good news. I want attachment schemas to
be a malleable form of implicit memory, so relationships with clients
can alter them in a salubrious manner. In this way, psychotherapy
becomes a guided attachment relationship for the purposes of assisted
homeostasis (moderate states of arousal) and eventual repair of insecure
attachment schemas (Amini et al., 1996; Cappas, Andres-Hyman, &
Davidson, 2005; Corrigan, 2004; Siegel, 1999). TABLE 17.3 Attachment
Plasticity Time Span 6 months during infancy 7 months during infancy 2
years during infancy 3.5 years during childhood Childhood to adolescence
Childhood to adolescence Childhood to adolescence Childhood to adulthood
17 weeks

Percentage of Subjects with Same Source Attachment Classification 62
(N=100) Vaughn et al., 1979 53 (N=43)

24 (N=223)

Thompson, Lamb & Estes, 1982 Egeland & Farber, 1984 Vondra et al., 2001

63 (N=30)

Hamilton, 2000

42 (N=84)

64 (N=50)

Lewis, Feiring, & Rosenthal, 2000 Weinfield et al., 2000 Waters et al.,
2000

55 (N=33)

Lawson et al., 2006

60 (N=189)

39 (N=57)

during adulthood 20 sessions of adult therapy

34 (N=29)

Travis et al., 2001

These studies reflect an array of ages, target populations, and methods
of assessing attachment. Although there is evidence of organized
attachment schemas by our first birthday, they do not appear to be set
in neural stone. These naturally occurring changes and the fact that we
attach and reattach with many people throughout our lives suggests that
the underlying neural systems maintain their plasticity. If you doubt
this, ask grandparents whether they feel attached to their
grandchildren. In support of the neuroplasticity of attachment networks,
research suggests that adults can create secure attachment for their
children despite negative experiences in their own childhood. Earned
autonomy, through the subconscious integration of early negative
experiences, results in the ability to serve as a safe haven for one's
own children. Thus, the powerful shaping experiences of childhood can be
modified through personal relationships, psychotherapy, and increased
selfawareness. The ability to consciously process stressful and
traumatic life events appears to correlate with more secure attachment,
flexible affect regulation, and an increased availability of narrative
memory. The integration of neural circuitry across cognitive,
behavioral, sensory, and emotional domains is the likely neuroanatomical
substrate of this earned autonomy. A healing relationship with a secure
partner or with a goodenough therapist, in which past pain can be
processed and resolved, supports earned autonomy and neural integration.
The Power of a Healing Relationship Being deeply loved by someone gives
you strength, while loving someone deeply gives you courage. ---Lao Tzu

Because our brains are social organs interwoven with the brains of those
around us, relationships have a direct impact on the biology of the
brain. Psychotherapy is successful in large part because of the
therapist's empathic abilities and the client's belief in the
therapist's humanity and skill. Through the instillation of optimism and
hope, a therapist (or any healer) uses powerful mechanisms of mind to
shape the functioning of the brain. The mind's impact on the brain has
been studied in a variety of fields from social neuroscience to
psychoneuroimmunology, and referred to as the effects of expectancy,
placebo, or self-fulfilling prophecy. These are all examples of the mind
leading the brain via the power of relationships. The term placebo,
Latin for "I shall please," reflects the ancient idea that response to
an inactive treatment results from the patient's desire to live up to
the doctor's expectations. The placebo effect has been expanded to
include sugar pills and other nonactive treatments, in contrast to what
are considered to be active chemical compounds. More generally, the
placebo effect is the expectation for illness outcome based on what the
patient is led to believe by the doctor. Moerman and Jonas (2002)
suggested renaming it "the meaning response," reflective of the fact
that the placebo effect is mediated via the meaning assigned to it by
the patient. Until modern times, medicine men and women, shamans, and
witch doctors understood and utilized this phenomenon in their role as
tribal healers (Frank, 1963). Similarly, the expectancy effect is likely
at play in the fact that ill Chinese Americans born during inauspicious
years have significantly shorter life spans. The size of this effect is
proportional to how strongly they hold on to traditional cultural
beliefs (Phillips, Ruth, & Wagner, 1993). Placebo effects are seen as a
nuisance in Western science, and the patients benefiting from them are
pathologized as weak minded, impressionable, or malingering. Modern
technological medicine has led to a decline in the use of the meaning
response as the role of the doctor has shifted from healer to
technician. This is especially ironic given that placebo control groups
are a staple of the research upon which their clinical decision making
should be based. Don't the time, money, and effort expended in this
standard of research methodology support the power of patient expectancy
to impact symptom expression? Perhaps doctors have become far too
impressed with their technology while neglecting the power of their
humanity. In a similar manner, expectancy and placebo effects are
usually relegated to the category of nonspecific effects in
psychotherapy outcome

research. I would argue that these effects are in fact specific---that
is, we know exactly what social and psychological factors lead to
healing. Carl Rogers outlined them well during the 1960s as warmth,
acceptance, caring, and unconditional positive regard. Epidemiologists
call them social support, network connectivity, and shared spiritual
beliefs. We will someday be able to specify and measure the
neuroanatomical and biochemical mechanisms of positive human
interactions. Different activation patterns in the brain during
successful placebo response reflect the multiple neural pathways
involved in mind--brain regulation. In neuroscience terms, the placebo
effect is an example of topdown cortical modulation of mood, emotion,
and immune activity (Beauregard, 2007; Ocshner et al., 2004). The
placebo effect relies heavily upon the prefrontal lobes to integrate
social experiences with positive affect and an optimistic state of mind.
In the same way that a mother can shape a child's brain by stroking his
hair and telling him that things will get better, a doctor can influence
a client's immune system by presenting an optimistic prognosis and
projecting confidence about the proposed treatment. The placebo effect
is a social phenomenon that likely activates the same reward systems
(dopamine-serotonin-endorphin) triggered by loving touch and the
anticipation of positive connections and feelings (Esch & Stefano, 2005;
Fricchione & Stefano, 2005). The amygdala, which regulates our
experience of fear and pain, is inhibited by positive emotions and
activated by negative emotions (Neugebauer et al., 2004). We know, for
example, that placebo and opioid analgesia share a common neural
pathway, which strongly suggests we are capable of opioid
self-administration (Pariente et al., 2005). There are many examples of
the social, top-down regulation of emotion. When a woman holds her
husband's hand in the face of threat, fear activation is attenuated. Not
surprisingly, the better she feels about the relationship, the greater
the soothing effect of his hand will be (Coan, Schaefer, & Davidson,
2006). Soothing touch is obviously powerful, but so too is a soothing
facial expression or a kind word communicated in an attuned emotional
state. Some evidence for this has been found when levels of arousal (as
measured by skin conductance) were monitored simultaneously in clients
and therapists during sessions. During states of matched arousal, there
were significantly more positive social and

emotional interactions between client and therapist than when they were
out of sync (Marci, Ham, Moran, & Orr, 2007). Even in Parkinson's
disease, it is believed that the anticipation of positive reward (a
frontal-cortical process) stimulates the release of dopamine from the
nucleus accumbens (a subcortical region called the ventral striatum).
Because dopamine depletion is the central cause of Parkinsonian
symptoms, this release of dopamine results in symptomatic improvement.
See Table 17.4 for an outline of studies that have demonstrated changes
in neural activation related to the placebo effect. TABLE 17.4 The
Impact of Positive Expectancy (Placebo) on Brain Activation Major
Depression Increased activity in prefrontal, anterior cingulate,
premotor, parietal, posterior insula, and posterior cingulate1 Decreased
activity in subgenual cingulate, parahippocampus, and thalamus2 Pain
Disorders Increased activity in lateral and orbital PFC, anterior
cinglate, cerebellum, right fusiform gyrus, parahippocampus, and pons3
Increased activity in the right dorsolateral cortex, anterior cingular
cortex, and midbrain4 Increased bilateral orbitofrontal activity and
anterior cingulate cortex contralateral to pain stimulus5 Reduced
activity in anterior cingulate cortex, anterior insula, and thalamus6
Increased activity in the prefrontal cortex7 Activated endogenous
opioids in dlpfc, anterior insula, and nucleus accumbens8 Parkinson's
Disease

Reduced activity in subthalamic nuclei9 Increase in striatal dopamine10

When physicians encourage their peers to use the placebo effect to
enhance illness outcome, the suggestions are very similar to the basic
principles of client-centered therapy. For example, an article in the
Journal of Family Practice suggested a "sustained partnership" with
patients characterized by an interest in the whole person, knowing the
patient over time, caring, sensitivity and empathy, being viewed as
reliable and trustworthy, adapting medical goals to the needs of the
patient, and encouraging full participation by the patient (Brody,
2000). Another physician in a piece from the British Medical Journal
asked, "For a thousand years the action of the placebo has made vast
numbers of patients feel better. Have we today provided a consultation
in which the placebo does not act?" (Thomas, 1987, p. 1202). These are
the aspects of traditional healing still employed by psychotherapy that
appear to have been lost in modern technical medicine. The implications
of the power of the placebo effect to change the brain are profound. Our
awe of technical medicine leads us to underestimate the importance of
the doctor's role as healer, and patients' abilities to contribute to
their own healing through the modulation of their endogenous
biochemistry. There are many ways in which the power of the placebo
effect could be harnessed and used to increase the effectiveness of
medical treatment including increasing visits, encouraging and
supportive interactions, and shaping patients' experiences by telling
them what positive outcomes they should expect (Walach & Jonas, 2004;
see Table 17.5 for a list of their suggestions). Ironically, we are only
required to tell clients of the many risks and negative side effects,
which likely guide their response to treatment in the opposite
direction. TABLE 17.5 Leveraging the Placebo Effect in Medical Treatment
Increase frequency of contact

Determine what treatments your patient believes in Align beliefs among
patient, doctor, family, and culture Be sure you believe in the
treatment you are administering Inform patients about what they can
expect Deliver treatment in a warm and caring way Listen and provide
empathy and understanding Touch the patient Findings from the medical
research supporting the power of specific doctor-patient interactions.
Adapted from Walach and Jonas (2004).

All of the "givens" of classical healing and psychotherapy have been
squeezed out of modern Western medicine. Perhaps these nonspecific
ingredients of a healing relationship will someday be interwoven with
the technical aspects of modern medicine. Summary The power of
psychotherapy to change the brain rests in our ability to recognize and
alter unintegrated or dysregulated neural networks. As knowledge of
neural plasticity and neurogenesis increases, so will our ability to
impact and alter the brain. The possibility exists that sensitive
periods can be reinstated in the context of psychotherapy, and that
stress can be utilized in a controlled manner to "edit and re-edit"
emotional memories (Post et al., 1998). Although the practical
application of these principles to humans remains on the distant
horizon, the possibilities of the involvement of psychotherapy in brain
sculpting are evident. It is certain that psychotherapists are already
enhancing plasticity without the help of genetic manipulation or
chemical interventions. Therapy is a safe emergency because of the
supportive structure in which difficult emotional learning takes place.
A client's sense of safety is enhanced by the therapist's skill,
knowledge, and confidence, which support emotional regulation and
maintaining moderate states of arousal. It is quite

possible that the caring, encouragement, and enthusiasm of the therapist
also reinforce learning, neural growth, and plasticity through the
enhanced production of dopamine, serotonin, and other neurochemicals
(Barad, 2000; Kilgard & Merzenich, 1998; Kirkwood, Rozas, Kirkwood,
Perez, & Bear, 1999). Successful therapeutic techniques may be
successful because of their very ability to change brain chemistry in a
manner that enhances neural plasticity. In the recent shift to neural
optimism, critical periods of neural development are being reconsidered
as important but, perhaps, not the final word on neural structure. The
impact of enriched environments has demonstrated the brain-building
capacity of positive experiences throughout the life span. More recent
research in neural plasticity (e.g., use-dependent plasticity,
neurotransmitter alteration, stem cell implantation) suggests that new
experiences, and future potential biological interventions, may be
capable of providing us with many tools with which to rebuild the brain.
Psychotherapy is on the verge of an exploding new paradigm: the
psychotherapist as neuroscientist. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 18

The Psychotherapist as Neuroscientist In this field we are merely at the
foothills of an enormous mountain range...unlike other areas of science,
it is still possible for an individual or small group to make important
contributions. ---Eric Kandel Psychotherapists are applied
neuroscientists who create individually tailored enriched learning
environments designed to enhance brain functioning and mental health. We
are skilled at teaching clients to become aware of unconscious
processing, take ownership of their projections, and risk anxiety in the
service of emotional maturation (Holtforth et al., 2005). In our work,
illusions, distortions, and defenses are exposed, explored, and tested
or modified with understandings closer to reality. Implicit memory--- in
the form of attachment schemas, transference, and superego---are made
conscious and explained as expressions of early experiences. We use a
combination of empathy, affect, stories, and behavioral experiments to
promote neural network growth and integration. Through all of this work,
subcortical networks that store memories of fears, phobias, and traumas
are activated and made accessible for integration with cortical
inhibitory circuitry. This essential integration allows for linkage
among explicit and implicit circuits, conscious awareness, and the
control of negative memories, sensations, and emotions. Regardless of
the client's particular problem, psychotherapy teaches a method to help
us better understand and use our brains. And as the dialogue between
psychotherapy and neuroscience continues to evolve, an increasing number
of scientific findings will be applied to both theory and clinical
practice.

Important factors in the therapeutic process have been identified as an
empathic and supportive relationship, maintenance of moderate states of
arousal, activation of both cognition and emotion, and co-construction
of narratives. A safe and empathic relationship establishes an emotional
and neurobiological context conducive to neural plasticity. It also
serves as a scaffold within which a client can better tolerate the
stress required for neural reorganization. We have already seen that
birds are able to learn their songs after sensitive periods when exposed
to other birds singing, but are unable to learn the same songs heard
from a tape recorder (Baptista & Petrinovich, 1986). Under certain
conditions, birds require positive social interactions and nurturance in
order to learn (Eales, 1985). And the stronger the relationship between
human trainers and their birds, the greater the learning will be for
both (Pepperberg, 2008). These studies, combined with what we know about
changes in biochemistry during interpersonal interactions, suggest that
a positive and attuned relationship enhances neural plasticity and
learning. The nearly insatiable drive of adolescents to be in constant
contact with one another may reflect the underlying drive for neural
stimulation during this crucial developmental period. Emotional
expression and modulation have been incorporated into psychotherapy
because of their impact on these underlying biological processes. The
importance of the activation of both emotion and cognition is recognized
by most psychotherapists. Releasing emotions associated with painful
memories, facing a feared situation, or experimenting with new
interpersonal relationships all involve some sort of stress, anxiety, or
fear. Although this way of thinking has been accepted clinically, we now
have considerable evidence to support the idea that moderate levels of
arousal optimize the production of neurotransmitters and neural growth
hormones that enhance LTP, learning, and cortical reorganization (Cowan
& Kandel, 2001; Zhu & Waite, 1998). Trauma undoubtedly changes us in
many ways, from our startle response to our attachments and
self-identity. Dissociation in reaction to trauma represents a breakdown
of neural integration and plasticity. In therapy, we use moderate levels
of arousal to access cortical mechanisms of plasticity in controlled
ways with specific goals. The safe emergency of therapy provides both
the psychological support and the biological stimulation necessary for
rebuilding the brain. Much of neural integration and reorganization
takes place in the association areas of the frontal,

temporal, and parietal lobes serving to coordinate, regulate, and direct
multiple neural circuits of memory and emotion. The importance of the
co-construction of narratives is grounded in the coevolution of the
cerebral cortex and language, reflecting the evolution of our brains as
social organs. Language within significant relationships has shaped the
brain during evolution and continues to do so throughout our lives.
Because of this, narratives embedded within an emotionally meaningful
relationship (like psychotherapy) are capable of resculpting neural
networks throughout life. Through the use of autobiographical memory, we
can create narratives that bridge processing from various neural
networks into a cohesive story of the self. Narratives allow us to
combine---in conscious memory---our knowledge, sensations, feelings, and
behaviors supporting underlying neural network integration. The
co-construction of narratives with parents serves as a medium of
transfer of the internal world of the parent to the child, from
generation to generation. These narratives reflect the implicit values,
problem-solving strategies, and worldviews of the parents. They also
serve to define us to ourselves and others, and guide us through our
complex social world. The more inclusive our narratives are in terms of
blending sensation, emotion, and cognition, the greater our ongoing
ability to integrate multiple neural networks. Research in attachment
has demonstrated that the coherence and inclusiveness of narratives
correlate with both attachment security and selfreflective capacity
(Main, 1993; Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, & Target, 2002). In the process of
evolution, different levels of language have emerged that appear to
parallel different layers of consciousness: 1. A reflexive social
language (of the left hemisphere interpreter) serves the purpose of
creating a logically cohesive and positive presentation to others. This
language evolved from grooming and hand gestures with the primary goal
of group affiliation and coordination. 2. An internal language, also
reflexive, allows us to have private thoughts, plan and guide behavior,
and deceive others. There is an aspect of internal language that
preserves early learning expressed through critical voices in our heads,
reflecting early shame experiences.

3. A third language, one of self-reflection, appears to be far less
reflexive and arises in states of openness, low defensiveness, and
safety. Although the first two levels of language occur spontaneously,
selfreflective language requires higher levels of neural network
integration, affect regulation, and cognitive processing. Reflexive
language keeps us in the present moment, while reflective language
demonstrates our ability to escape from the present moment, gain
perspective on our thoughts and feelings, and make decisions about what
we would like to change and how to change it. Attaining and utilizing
this level of language is one goal of psychodynamic psychotherapy. Three
levels of language sharing a common lexicon can result in a great deal
of confusion. Many people report feeling crazy because of the
simultaneous and contradictory beliefs they struggle with on a day-today
basis. Psychotherapy often involves sorting out these audio tracks in
order to provide us with a clearer idea of just what is going on in
there. The coconstruction of narratives, in the context of a healing
relationship, which sort out these inner contradictions may well be the
optimal context for significant plasticity in socioemotional neural
networks. Diagnosis and Treatment The principal activities of brains are
making changes in themselves. ---Marvin L. Minsky Functional brain
imaging has opened a window to the living human brain in the acts of
motor tasks, imagining a feared situation, being empathic, or telling a
lie. An examination of areas activated during these and many other
behaviors has enhanced our understanding of which neural networks
participate in various human functions. Although the application of
scanning technology to psychopathology is still in its infancy, there
have already been many important and provocative findings. As scanning
techniques become more precise and the hardware more affordable, they
will no doubt become incorporated into the practice of psychotherapy.
Neuroimaging has the potential to aid in diagnosis, treatment selection,
and the prediction of treatment outcome (Etkin et al., 2005; Linden,
2006).

As part of an initial assessment, it could help therapists pinpoint
areas of neural activation and inhibition. Treatment planning will
eventually come to include specific psychotherapeutic and
pharmacological interventions to enhance the growth and integration of
affected networks. Regular scans during the course of therapy may
someday be a useful adjunct to psychological tests, as ways of
fine-tuning the therapeutic process and measuring treatment success.
Associations between psychiatric symptoms and changes in the relative
metabolism of different areas of the brain are in the process of being
uncovered. We have already seen lower levels of metabolism in the left
prefrontal cortices of depressed patients (Baxter et al., 1985, 1989)
and increased metabolism in the right prefrontal and limbic region of
patients with PTSD (Rauch et al., 1996). The importance of the right
frontal region in PTSD is supported by clinical evidence such as the
onset of PTSD after injury to the right frontal area (Berthier, Posada,
& Puentes, 2001) and a "cure" of PTSD symptoms after a right frontal
lobe stroke (Freeman & Kimbrell, 2001). The inhibition of Broca's area
during intense fear states is already a focus of cognitive-behavioral
therapies, and a reactivation of the language centers may become a
standard measure of success in the treatment of PTSD and other
anxiety-related disorders. All of these findings support the existence
of specific circuitry involved in the recognition, reaction, and
regulation of anxiety and fear in the aftermath of traumatic
experiences. The focus of this new work, however, is somewhat different
than the old localization theories that attributed disorders of behavior
to specific areas of the brain. We now understand that each region of
the brain participates in multiple neural systems with highly complex
interactions and homeostatic functions. Thus, it is actually the
relationship between clinical symptoms and relative activity levels of
specific neural networks that are salient. The neurobiology of
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) has been of particular interest in
this regard. A neural circuit thought to mediate OCD includes the ompfc
and subcortical structures called the caudate nucleus, globus pallidus,
and thalamus. This cortical-subcortical circuit, involved with the
primitive recognition of and reaction to contamination and danger,
becomes locked into an activation loop in patients with OCD (Baxter et
al., 1992). It is hypothesized that the ompfc, or some other component
of the OCD circuit, activates the circuit with a worry signal,
decreasing inhibition

of the thalamus, which in turn excites the ompfc and caudate (Baxter et
al., 1992). The result is a feedback loop that is highly resistant to
inhibition or shutting down. Network Homeostasis and Treatment Outcome
The constant conditions which are maintained in the body might be termed
equilibria. ---Walter Cannon Considerable evidence supports the idea
that the reregulation of neural networks parallels some of the
symptomatic changes we witness in psychotherapy. In general, decreases
in fear and anxiety correlate with activation reductions in bottom and
right hemisphere regions. In OCD, there is a reduction in activation in
a region dedicated to the control and inhibition of impulses (ompfc). In
the successful treatment of social and spider phobias, there is a
decrease in activation in limbic and primitive cortical areas and in
right hemisphere processing, paralleling the decreased fear activation
that goes along with symptom reduction. In situations where there is a
deficit in cognitive processing such as in schizophrenia and brain
injury, we see symptom reduction correlated with increased frontal
activation. Keep in mind that the correlations do not prove causal
relationships; changes in brain activation patterns could also be
secondary to symptomatic changes, or both could be due to some third
unknown factor. Patterns of brain activation in both panic disorder and
PTSD are a bit more complex. In both of these disorders, sensory and
memory networks are hijacked by the amygdala and become internal sources
of fear. While studies have not yet focused on changes in brain
activation related to positive treatment outcome, we can speculate that
positive treatment response would correlate with decreased activation in
the amygdala, sensory motor areas, and the cerebellum (Bryant et al.,
2008; Pissiota et al., 2002), along with increased ompfc activation
(Phan et al., 2006; Williams et al., 2006). There would also be a
decreased activation in regions dedicated to autobiographical memory,
and an increase in the processing of information from the current
external environment (Sakamoto et al., 2005).

Psychotherapy outcome research with a number of disorders has found
changes in brain activation paralleling symptomatic improvement. In each
case, treatment seems to have reestablished a homeostatic balance
between interactive neural networks that were previously out of balance.
Table 18.1 outlines the studies that have been performed to measure the
neural correlates of successful therapy across a variety of patient
populations. TABLE 18.1 Successful Psychotherapy and Changes in Neural
Activation Diagnosis and Result Treatment OCD BT vs. Both: Decreased
metabolism in right caudate1 fluoxetine BT vs. BT: Left ompfc activation
correlated with positive fluoxetine response Fluoxetine: changes in the
opposite direction2 BT vs. Decreased CBF in right caudate3 controls CBT
Decreased metabolism in right caudate CBT and Increased bilateral grey
matter4 fluoxeitine Increased right parietal white matter5 Social phobia
CBT vs. Both: decreased amygdala, hippocampal, and adjacent citalopram
cortex activation CBT: decreased periaqueductal gray activation
Citalopram: decreased thalamic activation6 Spider phobia CBT Decreased
activation in parahippocampal gyrus and dlpfc7 CBT Decreased PFC
activation biased toward right hemisphere8

CBT Decreased activation in the insula and anterior cingulate9
Post-traumatic stress disorder EMDR (case Increased activation in
anterior cingulate and left frontal study) lobe10 Panic disorder CBT vs.
CBT: RH decreases in inferior temporal and frontal regions
Antidepressant LH increases in inferior frontal, medial temporal, and s
insula Antidepressants: RH decreases in frontal and temporal lobes LH
increases in frontal and temporal lobes11 CBT Decreased activation in
right hippo campus, left ACC, left cerebellum and pons Increased
activation in medial prefrontal cortex12 Major depressive disorder CBT
vs. CBT: decreased frontal activation / increased limbic paroxetine
Paroxetine: changes in the opposite direction13 CBT vs. Both: decreased
bilateral opfc and left mpfc activation and venlafaxine increased
activation in right occipital-temporal cortex14 IPT vs. IPT: increased
activation in right posterior cingulate and venlafaxine right basal
ganglia Venlafaxine: increased activation in right posterior temporal
and right basal ganglia15 IPT vs. Both: decreased activation in
prefrontal cortex paroxetine Both: increased activation in inferior
temporal and insula16 IPT vs. Both: symptom reduction with decreased
frontal activation

paroxetine Both: positive correlation with cognitive symptoms17
Schizophrenia Cognitive Increased frontal activation with improved
performance18 rehab Cognitive Increased activation in right inferior
frontal cortex and rehab occipital lobe19 Traumatic brain injury
Cognitive Global activation increase in 3 of 5 patients20 rehab The
results shown in this table should be considered preliminary because of
small sample sizes and variations in methodology. BT, behavior therapy;
CBT, cognitive-behavioral therapy; IPT, interpersonal therapy; EMDR, eye
movement desensitization and reprocessing. Adapted and expanded from
Roffman et al. (2005). Functional scan studies have demonstrated that
improvement of OCD symptoms is correlated with decreased activation of
the ompfc and caudate nucleus (Rauch et al., 1994). Especially
interesting to psychotherapists is the fact that these changes in brain
metabolism are the same whether patients are successfully treated with
psychotherapy or medication (Baxter et al., 1992; Schwartz et al.,
1996). Although psychotherapy and medication are the first choices for
treatment, they are not always successful. Scanguided psychosurgery for
patients who do not respond to any other forms of treatment can disrupt
runaway feedback by severing neural links within the OCD circuit (Biver
et al., 1995; Irle, Exner, Thielen, Weniger, & Ruther, 1998; Rubino et
al., 2000). Because symptoms can have multiple underlying causes,
diagnoses aided by neural network activity could improve diagnostic
accuracy. Increased specificity will naturally lead to increasingly
specific psychotherapeutic and pharmacological interventions. Tourette's
syndrome

---a disorder characterized by involuntary vocalizations and motor
tics--- often occurs in individuals who also suffer with OCD, enuresis,
or ADHD. This is not a coincidence, because these disorders share
underlying neural circuitry and neurotransmitters (Cummings & Frankel,
1985). They all stem from problems with the inhibition of subcortical
impulses by the frontal cortical areas. Thus, structural, biochemical,
and regulatory abnormalities in these interrelated top-down networks can
result in all four conditions. When this circuit is more fully
understood, symptoms of OCD, ADHD, enuresis, and Tourette's syndrome may
all become subsets of some future diagnosis referred to by the neural
networks responsible for these functions. In anxiety and depression,
some studies show that therapy achieves results through increased
cortical versus subcortical activation, while others show changes in the
activation patterns within the frontal lobes (Porto et al., 2009). And
while psychotherapy and medication can both lead to symptom reduction,
there is only partial neuroanatomical overlap in how they achieve their
results (Roffman et al., 2005). In other words, the same results can be
achieved by different treatment strategies and through changes in the
balance among different neural networks. This is in no way bad news for
psychotherapy. Cognitive therapy by experienced therapists is equally
efficacious as medication in moderate to severe depression (DeRubeis et
al., 2005). For depressed patients with a history of child abuse,
psychotherapy has been shown to be more effective, with the addition of
medication showing small benefits (Nemeroff et al., 2003). The
Centrality of Stress It's not stress that kills us, it is our reaction
to it. ---Hans Selye Although some stress is a normal part of life,
early, prolonged, or severe stress can result in significant and
long-term impairments in learning, attachment, and physiological
regulation (Glaser, 2000; O'Brien, 1997; Sapolsky, 1996). Stress plays a
role in the expression and severity of most, if not all, psychiatric and
medical disorders. Therefore, assessing and targeting stress as a focus
of psychotherapeutic intervention should always be an aspect of healing
relationships. Since therapists are trained to think in terms of
diagnostic categories and treatment modalities, stress often flies

under our diagnostic radar. Understanding and working to regulate our
clients' stress is central to psychotherapeutic success because of its
impact on neuroplastic processes. An emerging concept in treatment
involves buffering victims of stress from neural compromise by altering
their neurochemistry. One way of accomplishing this is to block the
secretion or uptake of norepinephrine and glucocorticoids soon after a
traumatic experience (Brunet et al., 2008; Liu et al., 1997; Meaney et
al., 1989; Watanabe, Gould, Daniels, Cameron, & McEwen, 1992). It has
also been found that the neurotransmitter neuropeptide-Y is found in
higher concentrations in the amygdalas of individuals who respond more
favorably to high levels of stress (Morgan et al., 2000). Artificially
increasing levels of neuropeptide-Y may buffer the nervous system from
some of the damaging effects of stress. Chemical blockade or disruption
of particular amygdala circuits may decrease some of the symptoms of
PTSD such as the startle and freeze responses (Goldstein, Rasmusson,
Bunney, & Roth, 1996; Lee & Davis, 1997). It has even been suggested
that stimulation of the amygdala could lead to the extinction of
conditioned fear (Li, Weiss, Chaung, Post, & Rogawski, 1998).
Understanding the role of LTP and other forms of plasticity in the
amygdala, as well as its role in fear conditioning, may provide another
avenue for future interventions in psychosis and PTSD (LaBar, Gatenby,
Gore, LeDoux, & Phelps, 1998; Rogan & LeDoux, 1996; Rogan, Staubli, &
LeDoux, 1997). We have seen that higher levels of maternal attention in
rats decrease the pups' subsequent HPA activation in response to stress
(Liu et al., 1997). Although I doubt that encouraging human mothers to
lick their children will be of much help, human infants demonstrate the
same pattern in response to maternal massage (Field et al., 1996), and
within securely attached relationships (Spangler & Grossman, 1993).
Maternal depression, separation, and deprivation are severe stressors
for infants, resulting in a variety of negative biological, emotional,
and social consequences (Gunnar, 1992). Aggressive treatment of
depression in new mothers, along with teaching them how to massage and
better interact with their infants, may counteract some of the negative
impact of maternal depression. Therapy focused on resolving a mother's
attachment difficulties or past trauma prior to giving birth may also be
helpful in reducing stress in their infants, children, and adolescents
(Trapolini, Ungerer, & McMahon, 2008).

An increased appreciation of the effects of maternal separation may
guide us as to the advisability of optional infant--mother separation.
Where separation is unavoidable in cases of illness and death, the
ability to lessen the impact of stress hormones via interpersonal and
chemical interventions may prevent problems later in life. Given the
amount of exposure in our society to stressful events such as abuse,
neglect, abandonment, and community violence, the impact of severe
stress on mothers and the developing brains of their children should be
a serious public health concern (Bremner & Narayan, 1998). Research
findings suggest that early stress leads to a vulnerability to
depression later in life (Widom, DuMont, & Czaja, 2007). This, in part,
is mediated by deficient organization of frontal circuitry, and the
establishment of lower levels of excitatory neurotransmitters and growth
hormones during sensitive developmental periods. Early childhood
experiences leading to a bias toward right hemisphere activation may
also play a role in the long-term development of depression. As we
discussed in the chapter on laterality, magnetic stimulation of the left
hemisphere of depressed patients and the right hemisphere of patients
with mania has shown promising results and may serve as a future
alternative to electroconvulsive therapy (Grisaru et al., 1998; Klein et
al., 1999; Teneback et al., 1999; Pascual-Leone et al., 1996). In line
with these findings, activation of the left hemisphere through sensory
stimulation results in a higher degree of self-serving attributions and
positive affect (Drake & Seligman, 1989). Relative left frontal
activation appears linked to a state of mind of "self-enhancement,"
which may decrease the risk for psychopathology and be manipulated by
changes in attitude or practices such as mindfulness meditation
(Tomarken & Davidson, 1994). The more we understand the relationship
between laterality and affect, the more we may be able to incorporate
techniques of selective activation of right and left hemispheres into
multimodal treatments for mood disorders and other psychiatric
difficulties. PTSD is primarily mediated and maintained by
neurobiological processes outside conscious control. The activation of
Broca's area in the face of high levels of affect appears to be an
important mechanism of action in most interventions with patients
suffering from PTSD and other anxiety disorders. We know that the ompfc
modulates and inhibits amygdala

activity, the very circuit we are activating when we help clients to
employ cognition to inhibit their fears. Despite new theories connecting
neural communication and psychopathology, no major form of psychotherapy
has emerged with the stated goal of neural network integration. This
being said, techniques such as the caloric test and the eye movements
used in EMDR seem to involve left-right and top-down integration as an
active element. Previously, we discussed the phenomenon of sensory
neglect, which occurs when there is damage to the right parietal lobe
(assumed to be responsible for the integration of sensory and motor
information from both sides of the brain). In the caloric test,
stimulation with cold water to the left ear results in rapid
side-to-side eye movements while activating regions of the right
temporal lobe (Friberg et al., 1985). Although there has been one report
of permanent remission of sensory neglect with this treatment, for most
the cure is only temporary (Rubens, 1985). The bilateral activation of
attentional centers in reaction to the caloric test results in increased
integration of previously dissociated attention and
information-processing systems (Bisiach et al., 1991). In the treatment
of PTSD with EMDR, past traumatic events are recalled and subjected to a
protocol that involves focusing attention on ideas, self-beliefs,
emotions, and bodily sensations. In addition, EMDR uses periodic
stimulation through watching the therapist's hand going back and forth
or having the legs touched alternately (Shapiro, 1995). This bilateral
and alternating (side-to-side) stimulation may serve to activate
attention centers in both temporal lobes in a manner similar to the
caloric test. Alternating activation may, in fact, enhance neural
network connectivity and the integration of traumatic memories into
normal information processing. Techniques such as EMDR may thwart or
reverse the brain's tendency toward neural network dissociation
secondary to trauma. Bilateral stimulation may enhance the
reconsolidation of traumatic memories with cortical-hippocampal circuits
providing contextualization in time and place. Activation of these same
circuits creates the possibility of building descending inhibitory links
to subcortical sensory-affective memory circuits (Siegel, 1995). Thus,
the right-left stimulation of attention may simultaneously trigger
integration of affect with cognition, sensation, and behavior throughout
the brain.

Once the relationships among neural circuits are more fully understood,
psychotherapists may employ these and other noninvasive techniques to
stimulate the brain in ways that enhance neural network integration.
Could activation of right hemisphere emotional regions during therapy
with alexithymic patients aid in the integration of emotional processes
with left hemisphere linguistic circuitry? Could activation of the left
hemisphere during emotional dyscontrol in borderline patients enhance
their ability to gain cognitive perspective and emotional regulation?
For conditions involving too much emotional inhibition, new learning may
be stimulated by creating moderate levels of affect in therapy; this
learning, in turn, may create a biochemical environment more conducive
to the integration of emotional circuitry into consciousness (Bishof,
1983; Chambers et al., 1999). This may be the underlying neurobiology of
Freud's belief that the presence of affect is necessary for change.
Simultaneous activation of neural networks of emotion and cognition may
result in a binding of the two in a way that allows for the conscious
awareness and integration of emotion. Treatment Rationales and
Combinations Sometimes I lie awake at night, and ask, "Where have I gone
wrong?" Then a voice says to me, "This is going to take more than one
night." ---Charles Schulz The fundamental premise put forth in this book
is that any form of psychotherapy is successful to the degree to which
it positively impacts the underlying neural network growth and
integration. I expect future research to continue supporting this basic
hypothesis. Furthermore, evolving technologies will provide us with
increasingly accurate ways of measuring activity within the brain and a
greater understanding of exactly what it is we are measuring. My hope is
that including neural network activity in our case conceptualization may
help to establish a common language for us to select, combine, and
evaluate the treatments we provide. It will, one hopes, help us to move
past debates between competing schools of thought to a more inclusive
approach to psychotherapy.

One long and hard-fought debate about treatment continues between
supporters of psychopharmacology and psychotherapy despite empirical
support for both approaches, individually and in combination. Brain
functioning offers us a way to look more deeply into the effects of both
talk and medication in regulating the brain and stimulating
neuroplasticity. Patients who come to see me for psychotherapy are often
adamant in their refusal to consider medication. Some feel frightened or
shamed if I suggest the use of drugs as an adjunct to psychotherapy. At
the same time I know that many discount talk therapy and will only seek
help from therapists who will prescribe medication. All clients could
benefit from education about brain functioning and the potential (even
synergistic) power of both interventions. On the one hand, the
therapeutic alliance supports positive expectancy, medication
compliance, and psychological well-being. On the other, medication can
help to achieve a state of body and mind that allows clients to benefit
from psychotherapy. Many patients who suffer brain damage resulting from
accidents participate in multimodal rehabilitation programs that include
physical, cognitive, and psychosocial interventions. The general
approach to rehabilitation after brain injury is to first assess which
systems have been damaged and which have been spared. The next step is
to develop a program that plays to the patients' strengths and attempts
to compensate for their weaknesses. Traffic and industrial accidents
often result in damage to the frontal cortex, making disorders of
attention, concentration, memory, executive functioning, and emotional
regulation common in neurological rehabilitation. These same
difficulties are common in many forms of psychological distress and
psychiatric illness. The traditional split between mind and brain has
resulted in the separate development of the fields of psychotherapy,
neuropsychology, and rehabilitation. When psychological difficulties are
conceptualized in the context of a brain--behavior relationship,
applying techniques from cognitive rehabilitation in psychotherapy
becomes an interesting possibility. For example, abnormalities of
frontal lobe functioning have been found in OCD, depression, and ADHD.
Because these disorders share many symptoms afflicting patients with
brain injury, psychotherapy patients with these and other psychiatric
diagnoses may benefit from the strategies of cognitive rehabilitation
(Parente & Herrmann, 1996).

An example of this was given in an earlier chapter, when I discussed how
the simple memory strategies I used to assist my patient Sophia in
remembering her appointments helped us to establish a solid alliance. My
working assumption was that a combination of decreased hippocampal
volume due to chronic stress and hypometabolism in the temporal lobes
related to depression created real, brain-related memory dysfunctions
(Bremner, Scott, et al., 1993; Brody et al., 2001). The success of
cognitivebehavioral treatments with depressed and anxious patients
underlines the importance of focusing on basic issues of reality
testing, focused attention, and emotional regulation in order to support
prefrontal functioning (Schwartz, 1996). Findings with borderline
clients of damage or dysfunction of the frontal and temporal lobes
support the use of cognitive rehabilitation techniques with this
population (Paris et al., 1999; Swirsky-Sacchetti et al., 1993). This
may help explain why borderline patients require increased levels of
structure to scaffold their erratic executive control and emotional
instability. Manipulation and organization of the physical environment,
sensory stimulation, and the type and amount of activity all impact
brain functioning. Psychoeducation and enlisting family and friends in
the therapeutic process (as utilized extensively in rehabilitation after
brain damage) are also potential mechanisms of change. A good example of
this is dialectical behavioral therapy (Linehan, 1993), which combines
exposure, cognitive modification, skills development, and
problem-solving skills to support prefrontal functioning. Diagnostic and
treatment approaches focused on cognitive deficits serve to decrease
shame and help to create a stronger treatment alliance. Highly
structured skill-building techniques, in the context of support and
understanding, may provide disorganized patients the opportunity for
early and clearly measurable success experiences. As our understanding
of neural networks related to memory, affect, and behavior expands,
prosthetic aids to these systems will be created and applied in the
psychotherapy context. Increasing interdisciplinary coordination of this
kind will require more comprehensive training for psychotherapists, not
only in neuroscience but also in cognition, memory, and rehabilitation
science. Removing the traditional barriers between psychotherapy and
rehabilitation may lead to a higher quality of care and greater
treatment success.

Why Neuroscience Matters to Psychotherapists In science the important
thing is to modify and change one's ideas as science advances.
---Herbert Spencer The psychotherapist as healer exists within a long
tradition of rabbis, priests, medicine women, and shamans. At the same
time, findings in social neuroscience make it clear that we are also in
the current scientific mainstream. In contrast to technological
medicine, we understand our profound personal role in the healing
relationship while simultaneously respecting the subjective experience
of our clients. In the absence of a brain-based model of change, the
leaders of our fields have learned to stimulate and guide neuroplastic
processes to help build, integrate, and regulate our clients' brains.
But why does an academic understanding of neuroscience make any
difference to our work? Here are a few thoughts. On a practical level,
adding a neuroscientific perspective to our clinical thinking allows us
to talk with clients about the shortcomings of our brains instead of the
problems with theirs. The truth appears to be that many human struggles,
from phobias to obesity, are consequences of brain evolution and not
deficiencies of character. Identifying problems that we hold in common
and developing methods to circumvent or correct them is a solid
foundation upon which to base a therapeutic alliance. As we come to
better understand the neural correlates of mental health and emotional
well-being, we may be able to use this knowledge to aid us in diagnosis
and treatment. Neuroscience may also someday provide us with a rationale
for an informed eclecticism as well as additional means of evaluating
outcome. We will be able to see which combination of treatments impacts
targeted neural networks and how changes in the activation of these
circuits correspond with symptom expression. Neuroscience can also
provide a common language to communicate with physicians,
pharmacologists, and neurologists who may also be treating our clients.
Finally, if you are anything like me, you might find a neuroscientific
perspective to be an exciting addition to many case conceptualizations.
Some therapists bristle at the integration of neuroscience and
psychotherapy, calling it irrelevant or reductionistic. I think I
understand their perspective and concerns---if you have a model of
therapy that works,

why bother with the brain? Would Rogers, Kohut, or Beck have been better
therapists if they had been trained as neuroscientists? Probably not. On
the other hand, it is hard for me to grasp how the brain could be
irrelevant to changing the mind. And while I dislike reductionism as
much as the next person, doesn't a tendency toward reductionism say more
about the thinker than the nature of natural phenomena? Our knowledge of
neuroscience highlights the fact that we primates have complex and
imperfect brains and should remain skeptical about what we think we
know. In other words, primates would be wise to doubt their beliefs and
remain open to new ideas. It is humbling and more than a little
frightening to realize that we rely on what may be the most complex
structure in the universe with little knowledge of how it works. But
even though we are only at the dawn of understanding the brain, an
appreciation of its evolutionary history, developmental sculpting, and
peculiarities of design can surely encourage us to begin to use it more
wisely. Practical things---like understanding the neural damage
resulting from drugs, stress, and early deprivation---should influence
everything from personal decision making to public policy. The neural
network dissociation that often results from exposure to combat should
make us pay closer attention to those whom we put in harm's way. Even
our tendencies to distort reality in the direction of personal
experience and egocentric needs should lead us to examine our beliefs
and opinions more carefully. We now know that mind and brain are
indivisible and that disorders traditionally thought of as psychological
need to be reconceptualized to include their neurobiological mechanisms.
And if brain dysfunction is central to a client's difficulties, the
"most illuminating interpretation" may not be as valuable as a little
accurate neurobiological knowledge (Yovell, 2000). Self-awareness is a
relatively new phenomenon in evolutionary history. Psychotherapy
increases neural integration through challenges that expand our
experience of and perspective on ourselves and the world. The challenge
of expanding consciousness is to move beyond reflex, fear, and prejudice
to a mindfulness and compassion for ourselves and others. Understanding
the promise and limitations of our brains is but one essential step in
the evolution of human consciousness. In conclusion, our brains are
inescapably social, their structures and functioning deeply embedded in
the family, tribe, and society. And while

the brain has many shortcomings and vulnerabilities, our ability to link
with, attune to, and regulate each other's brains provides us with a way
of healing. This is why the power of human relationships is at the heart
of psychotherapy. From my perspective, the value of neuroscience for
psychotherapists is not to explain away the mind or generate new forms
of therapy, but to help us grasp the neurobiological substrates of the
talking cure in an optimistic and enthusiastic continuation of Freud's
Project for a Scientific Psychology. OceanofPDF.com

Credits

Table 6.1: 1. Davidson and Fox, 1982 2. Canli et al., 1998 3. Wheeler,
Davidson, & Tomarken, 1993 4. Davidson & Fox, 1982; Harmon-Jones &
Allen, 19985. Tomarken, Davidson, Wheeler, & Dass, 1992 6. Coan, Allen,
& Harmon-Jones, 2001; Davidson et al., 1990; Ekman & Davidson, 1993; 7.
Urry et al., 2004 8. Fox & Davidson, 1988 9. Harmon-Jones & Allen, 1998
10. Harmon-Jones & Sigelman, 2001 11. Harmon-Jones & Sigelman, 2001 12.
Davidson et al., 199013. Fox & Davidson, 1986 14. Canli et al., 1998 15.
Davidson & Fox, 198216. Wheeler et al., 1993 17. Kalin, Shelton,
Davidson, & Kelley, 2001 18. Fox & Davidson, 1988 19. Davidson & Fox,
1989 Table 7.1: 1. Minagawa-Kawai et al., 2008; Nitschke et al., 2004 2.
Berthoz et al., 2002; Mitchell, Banaji, & Macrae, 2005 3. Mitchell,
Macrae, & Banaji, 2006 4. Gusnard et al., 2002 5. Goel & Dolan, 2001 6.
Frey & Petrides, 2000; Nobre et al., 1999 7. Ongur & Price, 2000 8.
Bechara et al., 1998; Gallagher et al., 1999; Gehring & Willoughby,
2002; Kringelbach, 2005; Krueger et al., 2006; O'Doherty, 2004 9.
Bechara et al., 1994; O'Doherty et al., 2002 10. Matsumoto & Tanaka,
2004 11. McGuire et al., 1996 12. Dias, Robbins, & Roberts, 1996;
Simpson, Drevets, et al., 2001; Simpson, Snyder, et al., 2001; Quirk &
Beer, 2006 13. Malloy et al., 1993; Teasdale et al., 1999; Beer et al.,
2006 14. Koechlin, Ody, & Kouneiher, 2003; 15. Dias et al., 1996;
Fuster, 1997; Nagahama et al., 2001 16. Knight & Grabowecky, 1995 17.
Rezai et al., 1993; Petrides, Alivisatos, & Frey, 2002 18. Henson,
Shallice, & Dolan, 1999 19. Levesque, Eugène, Joanette, Paquette, et
al., 2003 20. Pascual-Leone et al., 1996 21. Kroger et al., 2002;

Malloy et al., 1993; Teasdale et al., 1999 22. Mitchell et al., 2006 23.
Gray, Braver, & Raichle, 2002 Table 7.3: 1. Tamm, Menon, & Reiss, 2006
2. Bush et al., 1999; Tamm, Menon, Ringel, & Reiss, 2004 3. Tamm et al.,
2004 4. Rubia et al., 1999 5. Yu-Feng et al., 2007 6. Tamm et al., 2004
7. Zang et al., 2005 8. Yu-Feng et al., 2007 9. Lou, Henriksen, & Bruhn,
1984 10. Lee et al., 2005 11. Castellanos et al., 2002 12. Casey,
Castellanos, & Giedd, 1997 13. Li et al., 2007 14. Markis et al., 2007
15. Mackie et al., 2007 16. Ashtari et al., 2005 Table 8.1: 1. Dehaene,
Molko, Cohen, & Wilson, 2004 2. Victor & Roper, 2001 3. Sirigu et al.,
1996 4. Colby, 1998; Driver & Mattingley, 1998 5. Newman et al., 2003 6.
Rorden, Mattingley, Karnath, & Driver, 1997; Snyder & Chatterjee, 2004
7. Karnath, 1997; Ungerleider & Haxby, 1994 8. Schwartz et al., 2005 9.
Battelli et al., 2001; Claeys et al., 2003 10. Griffiths et al., 1998
11. Snyder & Chatterjee, 2004 12. Anderson & Mountcastle, 1983 13. Pia
et al., 2004 Table 8.2: 1. Griffiths et al., 1998 2. Chochon et al.,
1999 3. Newman et al., 2003 4. Uddin et al., 2005 5. Dehaene et al.,
2003 6. Molko et al., 2003 7. Chochon et al., 1999 8. Molko et al.,
2003; Rushworth, Krams, & Passingham, 2001 9. Newman et al., 2003 10.
Newman et al., 2003 11. Antal et al., 2008 12. Grefkes & Fink, 2005;
Wolpert, Goodbody, & Husain, 1998 13. Wolpert et al., 1998 14. Jonides
et al., 1998 15. Wagner et al., 2005 16. Marshuetz et al., 2000; Van
Opstal, Verguts, & Fias, 2008 17. Husain & Nachev, 2007 18. Astafiev et
al., 2003 19. Mountcastle, 1995 20. Orban et al., 1999 21. Castelli,
Glaser, & Butterworth, 2006; Fias et al., 2003; Lemer et al., 2003 22.
Fias et al., 2007 23. Ruby & Decety, 2001 24. Iaccoboni et al., 2004;
Jackson & Decety 2004 25. Vogeley et al., 2004

Table 12.1: 1. Bredy et al., 2003; Champagne et al., 2008 2. Weaver,
Grant, & Meaney, 2002; Weaver, Meaney, & Szyf, 2006 3. Garoflos et al.,
2008; Menard, Champagne, & Meaney, 2004 4. Liu et al., 2000 5. Zhang et
al., 2005 6. Menard et al., 2004 7. Weaver et al., 2004 8. Caldji,
Diorio, & Meaney, 2003 9. Caldji, Diorio, Anisman, & Meaney, 2004;
Caldji et al., 1998 10. Braun & Poeggel, 2001 11. Champagne et al., 2003
12. Champagne et al., 2001, 2003, 2006 13. Cameron, Fish, & Meaney, 2008
Table 12.2: 1. Zhang at al., 2002 2. Marais et al., 2008 3.
Leventopoulos et al., 2007 4. Caldji et al., 2000; Hsu et al., 2003; 5.
Rees, Steiner, & Fleming, 2006 6. Blaise et al., 2007 7. Brake et al.,
2004 8. Kuhn & Schanberg, 1998 9. Kalinichev et al., 2002 10. Coutinho
et al., 2002 11. Weaver et al., 2006 12. Ovscharoff & Braun, 2001 13.
Akbari et al., 2007 Table 12.3: 1. McCormick et al., 2000; Meaney et
al., 1988, 1991; O'Donnell et al., 1994; Smythe, Rowe, & Meaney, 1994 2.
Sarrieau, Sharma, & Meaney, 1988 3. Plotsky & Meaney, 1993 4. Kosten,
Lee, & Kim, 2007 5. Siviy & Harrison, 2008 6. Garoflos et al., 2007 7.
Vallée et al., 1997 8. Vallée et al., 1999 9. Costela et al., 1995;
Tejedor-Real et al., 1998 10. Weaver et al., 2000 11. Collette et al.,
2000 Table 13.1: 1. Krugers et al., 2006 2. Wantanabe, Gould, & McEwen,
1992 3. Alonso, 2000 4. Sapolsky, 1990 5. Dranovsky & Hen, 2006; Kelly,
Mullany, & Lynch, 2000; Pham et al., 2003; Prickaerts et al., 2004 6.
Kuhlmann, Piel, & Wolf, 2005; Kirschbaum et al., 1996; Newcomer et al.,
1994, 1999 7. West, 1993; Lupien et al., 1998 8. Bremner, Scott, et al.,
1993 9. Bremner, Southwick, et al., 1993; Vythilingam et al., 2002 10.
Bremner et al., 1995; 1997; Bremner, 2006; de Lanerolle et al., 1989 11.
Villarreal et al., 2002 12. Falkai & Bogerts, 1986; Nelson et al., 1998
13. Bourdeau et al., 2002; Condren & Thakore, 2001

Table 17.1: 1. Bennett, Diamond, Krech, & Rosenzweig, 1964; Diamond et
al., 1964 2. Kempermann et al., 1998; Walsh, Budtz-Olsen, Penny, &
Cummins, 1969 3. Kolb & Whishaw, 1998 4. Kolb & Whishaw, 1998 5. Kolb &
Whishaw, 1998 6. Ickes et al., 2000 7. Nilsson et al., 1993 8. Sirevaag
& Greenough, 1988 9. Sirevaag & Greenough, 1988 10. Guzowski, Setlown,
Wagner, & McGaugh, 2001 11. Torasdotter et al., 1998 Table 17.2: 1.
Fujikawa et al., 2000 2. Abercrombie et al., 2003; Andreano & Cahill,
2006; Domes et al., 2005 3. Takahashi et al., 2004 4. Conrad, Lupien, &
McEwen, 1999; Kerr, Huggett, & Abraham, 1994; Park et al., 2006; Yau et
al., 1995 5. Diamond et al., 1992 6. Pavlides et al., 1995 7. Sullivan,
Wilson, & Leon, 1989 8. Introini-Collison & McGaugh, 1987 Table 17.4: 1.
Mayberg et al., 2002 2. Mayberg et al., 2002 3. Kong et al., 2006 4.
Pariente et al., 2005 5. Petrovic et al., 2002 6. Wager et al., 2004 7.
Wager et al., 2004 8. Zubieta et al., 2005 9. Benedetti et al., 2004 10.
FuenteFernandez et al., 2001 Table 18.1: 1. Baxter et al., 1992 2. Brody
et al., 1998 3. Nakatani et al., 2003 4. Schwartz et al., 1996 5. Lazaro
et al., 2009 6. Furmark et al., 2002 7. Paquette et al., 2003 8.
Johanson et al., 2006 9. Straube et al., 2006 10. Levin, Lazrove, & Van
der Kolk, 1999 11. Prasko et al., 2004 12. Sakai et al., 2006 13.
Goldapple et al., 2004 14. Kennedy et al., 2007 15. Martin et al., 2001
16. Brody, Saxena, Stoessel, et al., 2001 17. Brody, Saxena, Schwartz,
et al., 2001 18. Penades et al., 2002 19. Wykes et al., 2002 20. Laatsch
et al., 1999 OceanofPDF.com

References

Abercrombie, H. C., Kalin, N. H., Thurow, M. E., Rosenkranz, M. A., &
Davidson, R. J. (2003). Cortisol variation in humans affects memory for
emotionally laden and neutral information. Behavioral Neuroscience, 117,
505--516. Adamec, R. E. (1991). Partial kindling of the ventral
hippocampus: Identification of changes in limbic physiology which
accompany changes in feline aggression and defense. Physiology and
Behavior, 49, 443--454. Adams, R. D., Victor, M., & Ropper, A. H.
(1997). Principles of neurology. New York: McGraw-Hill. Ahern, G. L.,
Schomer, D. L., Kleefield, J., Blume, H., Rees-Cosgrove, G., Weintraub,
S., et al. (1991). Right hemisphere advantage for evaluating emotional
facial expressions. Cortex, 27, 193--202. Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar,
M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A
psychological study of the strange situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Akaneya, Y., Tsumoto, T., Kinoshita, S., & Hatanaka, H. (1997).
Brainderived neurotrophic factor enhances long-term potentiation in rat
visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 6707--6716. Akbari, E.,
Chatterjee, D., Levy, F., & Fleming, A. (2007). Experiencedependent cell
survival in the maternal rat brain. Behavioral Neuroscience, 121,
1001--1011. Akirav, I., & Maroun, M. (2007). The role of the medial
prefrontal cortex-amygdala circuit in stress effects on the extinction
of fear. Neural Plasticity, doi: 10.1155/2007/30873. Alberini, C. M.
(2005). Mechanisms of memory stabilization: Are consolidation and
reconsolidation similar or distinct processes? Trends in Neuroscience,
28(1), 51--56.

Alexander, G. E., DeLong, M. R., & Strick, P. L. (1986). Parallel
organization of functionally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia
and cortex. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 9, 357--381. Alexander, G.
E., Furey, M. L., Grady, C. L., Pietrini, P., Brady, D. R., Mentis, M.
J., et al. (1997). Association of premorbid intellectual function with
cerebral metabolism in Alzheimer's disease: Implications for the
cognitive reserve hypothesis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 165--
172. Alexander, M. P., Stuss, D. T., & Benson, D. F. (1979). Capgras
syndrome: A reduplicative phenomenon. Neurology, 29, 334--339. Allen, J.
P., McElhaney, K. B., Kuperminc, G. P., & Jodl, K. M. (2004). Stability
and change in attachment security across adolescence. Child Development,
75, 1792--1805. Allen, J. S., Bruss, J., & Damasio, H. (2005). The aging
brain: The cognitive reserve hypothesis and hominid evolution. American
Journal of Human Biology, 17, 673--689. Allen, J. S., Damasio, H., &
Grabowski, T. J. (2002). Normal neuroanatomical variation in the human
brain: An MRI-volumetric study. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology, 118, 341--358. Allen, N. J., & Barres, B. A. (2005).
Signaling between glia and neurons: Focus on synaptic plasticity.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 15, 542--548. Allman, J., Rosin, A.,
Kumar, R., & Hasenstaub, A. (1998). Parenting and survival in anthropoid
primates: Caretakers live longer. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 95, 6866--6869. Allman, J. M., Hakeem, A., Erwin, J. M.,
Nimchinsky, E., & Hof, P. (2001). The anterior cingulate cortex: The
evolution of an interface between emotion and cognition. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 935, 107--117. Allman, J. M., Watson, K.
K., Tetreault, N. A., & Hakeem, A. Y. (2005). Intuition and autism: A
possible role for Von Economo neurons. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9,
367--373. Al-Mousawi, A. H., Evans, N., Ebmeier, K. P., Roeda, D.,
Chaloner, F., & Ashcroft, G. W. (1996). Limbic dysfunction in
schizophrenia and mania. A study using 18F-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose
and positron emission tomography. British Journal of Psychiatry, 169,
509--516.

Alonso, G. (2000). Prolonged corticosterone treatment of adult rats
inhibits the proliferation of oligodendrocyte progenitors present
throughout white and gray matter regions of the brain. Glia, 31,
219--231. Alonso, M., Vianna, M. R. M., Depino, A. M., de Souza, T. M.,
Pereira, P., Szapiro, G., et al. (2002). BDNF-triggered events in the
rat hippocampus are required for both short-and long-term memory.
Hippocampus, 12, 551-- 560. Altman, J., Wallace, R. B., Anderson, W. J.,
& Das, G. D. (1968). Behaviorally induced changes in length of cerebrum
in rats. Developmental Psychobiology, 1, 112--117. American Psychiatric
Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (4th ed., text revision). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association. Amini, F., Lewis, T., Lannon, R., Louie, A., Baumbacher,
G., McGuinness, T., et al. (1996). Affect, attachment, memory:
Contributions toward psychobiologic integration. Psychiatry, 59(3),
213--239. Andersen, R. A., & Mountcastle, V. B. (1983). The influence of
the angle of gaze upon the excitability of the light-sensitive neurons
of the posterior parietal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 3(3),
532--548. Andersen, R. A., Snyder, L. H., Bradley, D. C., & Xing, J.
(1997). Multimodal representation of space in the posterior parietal
cortex and its use in planning movements. Annual Review of Neuroscience,
20, 303--330. Anderson, A. K., Wais, P. E., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2006).
Emotion enhances remembrance of neutral events past. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 1599--1604. Anderson, C. M.,
Polcari, A., Lowen, S. B., Renshaw, P. F., & Teicher, M.H. (2002).
Effects of methyphenidate on functional magnetic resonance relaxometry
of the cerebellar vermis in boys with ADHD. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 159, 1322--1328. Anderson, C. R. (1976). Coping behaviors as
intervening mechanisms in the inverted-U stress-performance
relationship. Journal of Applied Psychology, 61(1), 30--34. Anderson, M.
C., & Green, C. (2001). Suppressing unwanted memories by executive
control. Nature, 410, 366--369. Andreano, J. M., & Cahill, L. (2006).
Glucocorticoid release and memory consolidation in men and women.
Psychological Science, 17, 466-- 470.

Andreasen, N. C. (2001). Brave new brain: Conquering mental illness in
the era of the genome. New York: Oxford University Press. Anisman, H.,
Zaharia, M. D., Meaney, M. J., & Merali, Z. (1998). Do early-life events
permanently alter behavioral and hormonal responses to stressors?
International Journal of Developmental Neuroscience, 16, 149-- 164.
Ansorge, M. S., Zhou, M., Lira, A., Hen, R., & Gingrich, J. A. (2004).
Early-life blockade of the 5-HT transporter alters emotional behavior in
adult mice. Science, 306, 879--881. Antal, A., Baudewig, J., Paulus, W.,
& Dechent, P. (2008). The posterior cingulated cortex and planum
temporale/parietal operculum are activated by coherent visual motion.
Visual Neuroscience, 25, 17--26. Ardila, A., Ostrosky-Solis, F.,
Rosselli, M., & Gomez, C. (2000). Agerelated cognitive decline during
normal aging: The complex effect of education. Archives of Clinical
Neuropsychology, 15, 495--513. Arnsten, A. F. T. (2000). Genetics of
childhood disorders: XVIII. ADHD, Part 2: Norepinephrine has a critical
modulatory influence on prefrontal cortical function. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 374--383.
Arnsten, A. F. T., & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1998). Noise stress impairs
prefrontal cortical cognitive function in monkeys: Evidence for a
hyperdopaminergic mechanism. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 362--
368. Arnsten, A. F. T., & Li, B. (2005). Neurobiology of executive
functions: Catecholamine influences on prefrontal cortical functions.
Biological Psychiatry, 57, 1377--1384. Ashtari, M., Kumra, S., Bhaskar,
S., Clarke, T., Thaden, E., Cervellione, K.L., et al. (2005).
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A preliminary diffusion tensor
imaging study. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 448--455. Astafiev, S.,
Shulman, G., Stanley, C., Snyder, A., Van Essen, D., & Corbetta, M.
(2003). Functional organization of human intraparietal and frontal
cortex for attending, looking and pointing. Journal of Neuroscience, 23,
4689--4699. Aston-Jones, G., Valentino, R. J., VanBockstaele, E. J., &
Meyerson, A. T. (1994). Locus coeruleus, stress, and PTSD: Neurobiology
and clinical parallels. In M. M. Murburg (Ed.), Catecholamine function
in posttraumatic

stress disorder: Emerging concepts (pp. 17--62). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press. Augustine, J. R. (1996). Circuitry and
functional aspects of the insular lobe in primates including humans.
Brain Research Reviews, 22, 229--244. Baars, B. J. (2002). The conscious
access hypothesis: Origins and recent evidence. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6(1), 47--52. Bachar, E., Kanyas, K., Latzer, Y., Canetti, L.,
Bonne, O., & Lerer, B. (2008). Depressive tendencies and lower levels of
self-sacrifice in mothers, and selflessness in their anorexic daughters.
European Eating Disorders Review, 16, 184--190. Bagby, R. M., & Taylor,
G. J. (1997). Affect dysregulation and alexithymia. In G. J. Taylor, R.
M. Bagby, & J. D. A. Parker (Eds.), Disorders of affect regulation:
Alexithymia in medical and psychiatric illness (pp. 26--45). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. Baird, A. A., Gruber, S. A., Fein, D. A.,
Maas, L. C., Steingard, R. J., Renshaw, P. F., et al. (1999). Functional
magnetic resonance imaging of facial affect recognition in children and
adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 38, 195--199. Baldi, E., & Bucherelli, C. (2005). The
inverted "U-shaped" dose-effect relationships in learning and memory:
Modulation of arousal and consolidation. Nonlinearity in Biology,
Toxicology, and Medicine, 3, 9--21. Baptista, L. F., & Petrinovich, L.
(1986). Song development in the white-crowned sparrow: Social factors
and sex differences. Animal Behavior, 34, 1359--1371. Bar, M., Kassam,
K. S., Ghuman, A. S., Boshyan, J., Schmidt, A. M., Dale, A. M., et
al. (2006). Top-down facilitation of visual recognition. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 449--454. Barad, M. (2000).
A biological analysis of transference. Paper presented at the UCLA
Annual Review of Neuropsychiatry, February 2, Indian Wells, California.
Barbas, H. (1995). Anatomic basis of cognitive-emotional interactions in
the primate prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews,
19, 499--510. Barde, Y. A. (1989). Trophic factors and neuronal
survival. Neuron, 2, 1525--1534. Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L.
(1999). The unbearable automaticity of being. American Psychologist, 54,
462--479.

Barry, R. J., Clarke, A. R., McCarthy, R., Selikowitz, M., Johnstone, S.
J., & Rushby, J. A. (2004). Age and gender effects in EEG coherence: I.
Developmental trends in normal children. Clinical Neurophysiology, 115,
2252--2258. Bartels, A., & Zeki, S. (2000). The neural basis of romantic
love. NeuroReport, 11, 3829--3834. Bartzokis, G., Beckson, M., Lu, P.
H., Nuechterlein, K. H., Edwards, N., & Mintz, J. (2001). Age-related
changes in frontal and temporal lobe volumes in men. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 58, 461--465. Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of
mind. New York: Ballantine Books. Battelli, L., Cavanagh, P.,
Intrilligator, J., Tramo, M. J., Henaff, M., Michel, F., et al. (2001).
Unilateral right parietal damage leads to bilateral deficit for
high-level motion. Neuron, 32, 985--995. Baxter, L. R., Phelps, M. E.,
Mazziotta, J. C., Schwartz, J. M., Gerner, R. H., Selin, C. E., et
al. (1985). Cerebral metabolic rates for glucose metabolism in mood
disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 42, 441-- 447. Baxter, L. R.,
Schwartz, J. M., Bergman, K. S., Szuba, M. P., Guze, B. H., Mazziotta,
J. C., et al. (1992). Caudate glucose metabolic rate changes with both
drug and behavior therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 40, 681--689. Baxter, L. R., Schwartz, J. M.,
Phelps, M. E., Mazziotta, J. C., Guze, B. H., Selin, C. E., et
al. (1989). Reduction of prefrontal cortex glucose metabolism common to
three types of depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 243--250.
Beatty, J. (2001). The human brain: Essentials of behavioral
neuroscience. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Beauregard, M. (2007). Mind does
really matter: Evidence from neuroimaging studies of emotional
self-regulation, psychotherapy, and placebo effect. Progress in
Neurobiology, 81(4), 218--236. Beauregard, M., Lévesque, J., &
Bourgouin, P. (2001). Neural correlates of conscious self-regulation of
emotion. Journal of Neuroscience, 21, RC165, 1--6. Bechara, A., Damasio,
A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S. W. (1994). Insensitivity to future
consequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50,
7--15.

Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Anderson, S. W. (1998).
Dissociation of working memory from decision making within the human
prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 428--437. Bechara, A.,
Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. (1997). Deciding advantageously
before knowing the advantageous strategy. Science, 275, 1293--1295.
Bechara, A., & Naqvi, N. (2004). Listening to your heart: Interoceptive
awareness as a gateway to feeling. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 102--103.
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., Adolphs, R., Rockland, C., &
Damasio, A. R. (1995). Double dissociation of conditioning and
declarative knowledge relative to the amygdala and hippocampus in
humans. Science, 269, 1115--1118. Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy
and emotional disorders. New York: International University Press. Beck,
A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy
of depression. New York: Guilford. Beeghly, M., & Cicchetti, D., (1994).
Child maltreatment, attachment, and the self-system: Emergence of an
internal state lexicon in toddlers at high social risk. Development and
Psychopathology, 6, 5--30. Beer, J. S., Heerey, E. A., Keltner, D.,
Scabini, D., & Knight, R. T. (2003). The regulatory function of
self-conscious emotion: Insights from patients with orbitofrontal
damage. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 594--604.
Beer, J. S., John, O. P., Scabini, D., & Knight, R. T. (2006).
Orbitofrontal cortex and social behavior: Integrating self-monitoring
and emotion-cognition interactions. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
18(6), 871--879. Bekinschtein, P., Cammarota, M., Katche, C., Slipczuk,
L., Rossato, J. I., Goldin, A., et al. (2008). BDNF is essential to
promote persistence of long-term memory storage. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 105, 2711--2716. Bell, M. A., & Fox,
N. A. (1992). The relations between frontal brain electrical activity
and cognitive development during infancy. Child Development, 63,
1142--1163. Belmaker, R. H., & Grisaru, N. (1999). Anti-bipolar
potential for transcranial magnetic stimulation. Bipolar Disorders,
1(2), 71--72.

Benedetti, F., Colloca, L., Torre, E., Lanotte, M., Melcarne, A.,
Pesare, M., et al. (2004). Placebo-responsive Parkinson patients show
decreased activity in single neurons of subthalamic nucleus. Nature
Neuroscience, 7, 587--588. Benes, F. M. (1989). Myelination of
cortical-hippocampal relays during late adolescence. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 15, 585--593. Benes, F. M., Taylor, J. B., & Cunningham, M. C.
(2000). Convergence and plasticity of monoaminergic systems in the
medial prefrontal cortex during the postnatal period: Implications for
the development of psychopathology. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 1014--1027.
Bennett, A. J., Lesch, K. P., Heils, A., Long, J. C., Lorenz, J. G.,
Shoaf, S. E., et al. (2002). Early experience and serotonin transporter
gene variation interact to influence primate CNS function. Molecular
Psychiatry, 7, 118--122. Bennett, E. L., Diamond, M. C., Krech, D., &
Rosenweig, M. R. (1964). Chemical and anatomical plasticity of brain.
Science, 146, 610--619. Benson, F. D. (1994). The neurology of thinking.
New York: Oxford University Press. Berntson, G. C., Bechara, A.,
Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2007). Amygdala contribution
to selective dimensions of emotion. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience, 2, 123--129. Berntson, G. G., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2008).
The functional neuroarchitecture of evaluative processes. In A. J.
Elliot (Ed.), Handbook of approach and avoidance motivation
(pp. 305--316). New York: CRC Press. Berthier, M. L., Posada, A., &
Puentes, C. (2001). Dissociative flashbacks after right frontal injury
in a Vietnam veteran with combatrelated posttraumatic stress disorder.
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 13, 101--105.
Berthoz, S., Armony, J. L., Blair, R. J. R., & Dolan, R. J. (2002). An
fMRI study of intentional and unintentional (embarrassing) violations of
social norms. Brain, 125, 1696--1708. Berton, O., McClung, C. A.,
DiLeone, R. J., Krishnan, V., Renthal, W., Russo, S. J., et al. (2006).
Essential role of BDNF in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway in social
defeat stress. Science, 311, 864--868. Bhide, P. G., & Bedi, K. S.
(1982). The effects of environmental diversity on well-fed and
previously undernourished rats: I. Body and brain

measurements. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 207, 403--409. Birnbaum,
S., Gobeske, K. T., Auerbach, J., Taylor, J. R., & Arnsten, A. F.T.
(1999). A role for norepinephrine in stress-induced cognitive deficits:
a-1-adrenoceptor mediation in the prefrontal cortex. Biological
Psychiatry, 46, 1266--1274. Bischoff-Grethe, A., Proper, S. M., Mao, H.,
Daniels, K. A., & Berns, G. S. (2000). Conscious and unconscious
processing of nonverbal predictability in Wernicke's area. Journal of
Neuroscience, 20, 1975--1981. Bishof, H. (1983). Imprinting and cortical
plasticity: A comparative review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 7, 213--225. Bishop, S. J. (2007). Neurocognitive mechanisms of
anxiety: An integrative account. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(7),
307--316. Bishop, S., Duncan, J., Brett, M., & Lawrence, A. (2004).
Prefrontal cortical function and anxiety: Controlling attention to
threat-related stimuli. Nature Neuroscience, 7(2), 184--187. Bishop, S.,
Duncan, J., & Lawrence, A. D. (2004). State anxiety of the amygdala
response to unattended threat-related stimuli. Journal of Neuroscience,
24, 10364--10368. Bisiach, E., & Luzzatti, C. (1978). Unilateral neglect
of representational space. Cortex, 14, 129--133. Bisiach, E., Rusconi,
M. L., & Vallar, G. (1991). Remission of somatoparaphrenic delusions
through vestibular stimulation. Neuropsychologia, 29, 1029--1031. Biver,
F., Goldman, S., Francois, A., De La Porte, C., Luxen, A., Gribomont,
B., et al. (1995). Changes in metabolism of cerebral glucose after
stereotactic leukotomy for refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder: A
case report. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 58,
502--505. Black, J. E. (1998). How a child builds its brain: Some
lessons from animal studies of neural plasticity. Preventive Medicine,
27, 168--171. Blaise, J. H., Koranda, J. L., Chow, U., Haines, K. E., &
Doward, E. C. (2007). Neonatal isolation stress alters bidirectional
long-term synaptic plasticity in amygdalo-hippocampal synapses in freely
behaving adult rats. Brain Research, 1193, 25--33. Blanke, O., & Arzy,
S. (2005). The out-of-body experience: Disturbed self-processing at the
temporo-parietal junction. Neuroscientist, 11, 11--24.

Blass, R. B., & Carmeli, Z. (2007). The case against
neuropsychoanalysis. On fallacies underlying psychoanalysis' latest
scientific trend and its negative impact on psychoanalytic discourse.
International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 88, 19--40. Blonder, L. X.,
Bowers, D., & Heilman, K. M. (1991). The role of right hemisphere in
emotional communication. Brain, 114, 1115--1127. Blum, D. (2002). Love
at Goon Park. Cambridge: Perseus. Bollas, C. (1987). The shadow of the
object: Psychoanalytic of the unthought known. New York: Columbia
University Press. Bonda, E., Petrides, M., Frey, S., & Evans, A. C.
(1994). Frontal cortex involvement in organized sequences of hand
movements: Evidence from a positron emission tomography study
\[abstract\]. Social Neuroscience Abstracts, 20, 353. Bonda, E.,
Petrides, M., Ostry, D., & Evans, A. (1996). Specific involvement of
human parietal systems and the amygdala in the perception of biological
motion. Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 3737--3744. Bornstein, M. H.
(1989). Sensitive periods in development: Structural characteristics and
causal interpretations. Psychological Bulletin, 105, 179-- 197. Borod,
J. C., Cicero, B. A., Obler, L. K., Welkowitz, J., Erhan, H. M.,
Santschi, C., et al. (1998). Right hemisphere emotional perception:
Evidence across multiple channels. Neuropsychology, 12, 446--458.
Bourdeau, I., Bard, C., Noel, B., Leclerc, I., Cordeau, M. P., Belair,
M., et al. (2002). Loss of brain volume in endogenous Cushing's syndrome
and its reversibility after correction hypercortisolism. Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 87, 1949--1954. Bowen, M. (1978).
Family therapy in clinical practice. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment. New York: Basic Books. Bowlby, J. (1988).
A secure base: Clinical applications of attachment theory. London:
Routledge. Bradshaw, J. (1990). Homecoming: Reclaiming and championing
your inner child. New York: Bantam Books. Brake, W. G., Zhang, T. Y.,
Diorio, J., Meaney, M. J., & Gratton, A. (2004). Influence of early
postnatal rearing conditions on mesocorticolimbic dopamine and
behavioural responses to

psychostimulants and stressors in adult rats. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 19, 1863--1874. Branchi, I., D'Andrea, I., Sietzema, J.,
Fiore, M., Di Fausto, V., Aloe, L., et al. (2006). Early social
enrichment augments adult hippocampal BDNF levels and survival of
BrdU-positive cells while increasing anxietyand "depression"-like
behavior. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 83, 965--973. Branchi, I.,
Francia, N., & Alleva, E. (2004). Epigenetic control of neurobehavioral
plasticity: The role of neurotrophins. Behavioral Pharmacology,
15(5--6), 353--362. Braun, C., Scweizer, R., Elbert, T., Borbaumer, N.,
& Taub, E. (2000). Differential activation in somatosensory cortex for
different discrimination tasks. Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 446--450.
Braun, K., & Poeggel, G. (2001). Recognition of mother's voice evokes
metabolic activation in the medial prefrontal cortex and lateral
thalamus of Octodon degus pups. Neuroscience, 103, 861--864. Bredy, T.
W., Grant, R. J., Champagne, D. L., & Meaney, M. J. (2003). Maternal
care influences neuronal survival in the hippocampus of the rat.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 2903--2909. Bredy, T., Zhang, T.,
Grant, R., Diorio, J., & Meaney, M. (2004). Peripubertal environmental
enrichment reverses the effects of maternal care on hippocampal
development and glutamate receptor subunit expression. European Journal
of Neuroscience, 20(5), 1355--1362. Bremner, J. (2006). Stress and brain
atrophy. CNS and Neurological Disorders---Drug Targets, 5, 503--512.
Bremner, J. D., & Narayan, M. (1998). The effects of stress on memory
and the hippocampus throughout the life cycle: Implications for
childhood development and aging. Development and Psychopathology, 10,
871--885. Bremner, J. D., Randall, P., Scott, T., & Bronen, R. (1995).
MRI-based measurement of hippocampal volume in patients with
combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 152, 973-- 983. Bremner, J. D., Randall, P., Vermetten, E.,
Staib, L., Bronen, R. A., Mazure, C., et al. (1997). Magnetic resonance
imaging-based measurement of hippocampal volume in posttraumatic stress
disorder related to childhood physical and sexual abuse: A preliminary
report. Biological Psychiatry, 41, 23--32.

Bremner, J. D., Scott, T. M., Delaney, R. C., Southwick, S. M., Mason,
J. W., Johnson, D. R., et al. (1993). Deficits of short-term memory in
posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 150,
1015-- 1019. Bremner, J. D., Southwick, S. M., Johnson, D. R., Yehuda,
R., & Charney, D. S. (1993). Childhood physical abuse and combat-related
posttraumatic stress disorder in Vietnam veterans. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 150, 235--239. Brennan, K. A., & Shaver, P. R. (1995).
Dimensions of adult attachment, affect regulation, and romantic
relationship functioning. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
21, 267--283. Brennan, P. A., Pargas, R., Walker, E. F., Green, P.,
Newport, D. J. & Stowe, Z. (2008). Maternal depression and infant
cortisol: Influences of timing, comorbidity and treatment. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 49, 1099--1107. Brewin, C. R.,
Dalgleish, T., & Joseph, S. (1996). A dual representation theory of post
traumatic stress disorder. Psychological Research, 103, 670-- 686.
Brewin, C. R., & Smart, L. (2005). Working memory capacity and
suppression of intrusive thoughts. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 36, 61--68. Broadhurst, P. L. (1957).
Emotionality and the Yerkes-Dodson law. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54(5), 345--352. Brodal, P. (1992). The central nervous
system. New York: Oxford University Press. Brody, A. L., Mandelkern, M.
A., Olmstead, R. E., Jou, J., Tiongson, E., Allen, V., et al. (2007).
Neural substrates of resisting craving during cigarette cue exposure.
Biological Psychiatry, 62, 642--651. Brody, A. L., Saxena, S.,
Mandelkern, M. A., Fairbanks, L. A., Ho, M. L., & Baxter, L. R. (2001).
Brain metabolic changes associated with symptom factor improvement in
major depressive disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 50, 171--178. Brody,
A. L., Saxena, S., Schwartz, J. M., Stoessel, P. W., Maidment, K.,
Phelps, M. E., et al. (1998). FDG-PET predictors of response to
behavioral therapy and pharmacotherapy in obsessive compulsive disorder.
Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 84, 1--6.

Brody, A. L., Saxena, S., Stoessel, P., Gillies, L. A., Fairbanks, L.
A., Alborzian, S., et al. (2001). Regional brain metabolic changes in
patients with major depression treated with either paroxetine or
interpersonal therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 631--640.
Brody, H. (2000). The placebo response: Recent research and implications
for family medicine. Journal of Family Practice, 49, 649--654. Brosch,
T., Sander, D., & Scherer, K. R. (2007). That baby caught my
eye...Attention capture by infant faces. Emotion, 7(3), 685--689.
Brothers, L. (1997). Friday's footprint. New York: Oxford University
Press. Brown, H. D., Kosslyn, S. M., Breiter, H. C., Baer, L., & Jenike,
M. A. (1994). Can patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder
discriminate between percepts and mental images? A signal detection
analysis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 445--454. Brown, S. M.,
Henning, S., & Wellman, C. L. (2005). Mild, short-term stress alters
dendritic morphology in rat medial prefrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex,
15, 1714--1722. Bruder, G. E., Stewart, J. W., Mercier, M. A., Agosti,
V., Leite, P., Donovan, S., et al. (1997). Outcome of
cognitive-behavioral therapy for depression: Relation to hemispheric
dominance for verbal processing. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106(1),
138--144. Bruner, J. S. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. Brunet, A., Orr, S. P., Tremblay, J., Robertson, K.,
Nader, K., & Pitman, R.K. (2008). Effects of post-retrieval propranolol
on psychophysiologic responding during subsequent script-given traumatic
imagery in posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 42, 503--506. Bryant, R. A., Kemp, A. H., Felmingham, K. L.,
Liddell, B., Oliveri, G., Peduto, A., et al. (2008). Enhanced amygdala
and medial prefrontal activation during nonconscious processing of fear
in posttraumatic stress disorder: An fMRI study. Human Brain Mapping,
29, 517--523. Buchanan, T. W., Tranel, D., & Adolphs, R. (2006).
Impaired memory retrieval correlates with individual differences in
cortisol response but not autonomic response. Learning and Memory, 13,
382--387. Buonomano, D. V., & Merzenich, M. M. (1998). Cortical
plasticity: From synapses to maps. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 21,
149--186.

Bush, G., Frazier, J. A., Rauch, S. L., Seidman, L. J., Whalen, P. J.,
Jenike, M. A., et al. (1999). Anterior cingulate cortex dysfunction in
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder revealed by fMRI and the
counting Stroop. Biological Psychiatry, 45, 1542--1552. Bush, G., Luu,
P., & Posner, M. I. (2000). Cognitive and emotional influences in
anterior cingulate cortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 215--222.
Bush, G., Valera, E. M., & Seidman, L. J. (2005). Functional
neuroimaging of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A review and
suggested future directions. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 1273--1284.
Bush, G., Vogt, B. A., Holmes, J., Dale, A. M., Greve, D., Jenike, M.
A., et al. (2002). Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex: A role in
reward-based decision making. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 99, 507--512. Butler, R. W., Braff, D. L., Rauch, J. L.,
Jenkins, M. A., Sprock, J., & Geyer, M. A. (1990). Physiological
evidence of exaggerated startle response in a subgroup of Vietnam
veterans with combat-related PTSD. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147,
1308--1312. Cabeza, R., & St. Jacques, P. (2007). Functional
neuroimaging of autobiographical memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
11(5), 219--227. Cacioppo, J. T., & Berntson, G. (Eds.). (2004). Social
neuroscience: Key readings in social psychology. New York: Psychology
Press. Cahill, L., & McGaugh, J. L. (1998). Mechanisms of emotional
arousal and lasting declarative memory. Trends in Neurosciences, 21,
294--299. Cahill, L., Prins, B., Weber, M., & McGaugh, J. L. (1994).
Betaadrenergic activation and memory for emotional events. Nature, 371,
702-- 704. Calder, A. J., Keane, J., Manly, T., Sprengelmeyer, R.,
Scott, S., Nimmo-Smith, S., et al. (2003). Facial expression recognition
across the adult life span. Neuropsychologia, 41, 195--202. Caldji, C.,
Diorio, J., Anisman, H., & Meaney, M. (2004). Maternal behavior
regulated benzodiazepine/GABA receptor subunit expression in brain
regions associated with fear in BALB/c and C67BL/6 mice.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 29, 1344--1352. Caldji, C., Diorio, J., &
Meaney, M. J. (2003). Variations in maternal care alter GABA-sub (A)
receptor subunit expression in brain regions associated with fear.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 1950--1959.

Caldji, C., Francis, D., Sharma, S., Plotsky, P. M., & Meaney, M. J.
(2000). The effects of early rearing environment on the development of
GABA-sub (A) and central benzodiazepine receptor levels and
noveltyinduced fearfulness in the rat. Neuropsychopharmacology, 22,
219--229. Caldji, C., Tannenbaum, B., Sharma, S., Francis, D., Plotsky,
P. M., & Meaney, M. J. (1998). Maternal care during infancy regulates
the development of neural systems mediating the expression of
fearfulness in the rat. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 95, 5335-- 5340. Cameron, N. M., Champagne, F. A., Parent, C.,
Fish, E. W., OzakiKuroda, K., & Meaney, M. J. (2005). The programming of
individual differences in defensive responses and reproductive
strategies in the rat through variations in maternal care. Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 29, 843--865. Cameron, N., Fish, E., &
Meaney, M. (2008). Maternal influences on the sexual behavior and
reproductive success of the female rat. Hormones and Behavior, 54,
178--184. Campbell, J. (1949). The hero with a thousand faces. Novato,
CA: New World Library. Canli, T., Desmond, J. E., Zhao, Z., Glover, G.,
& Gabrieli, J. D. E. (1998). Hemispheric asymmetry for emotional stimuli
detected with fMRI. NeuroReport, 9, 3233--3239. Canli, T., & Lesch, K.
(2007). Long story short: The serotonin transporter in emotion
regulation and social cognition. Nature Neuroscience, 10, 1103--1109.
Canli, T., Qiu, M., Omura, K., Congdon, E., Haas, B. W., Amin, Z., et
al. (2006). Neural correlates of epigenesis. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 16033--16038. Cappa, S., Sterzi, R.,
Vallar, G., & Bisiach, E. (1987). Remission of hemineglect and
anosognosia during vestibular stimulation. Neuropsychologia, 25,
775--782. Cappas, N. M., Andres-Hyman, R., & Davidson, L. (2005). What
psychotherapists can begin to learn from neuroscience: Seven principles
of a brain-based psychotherapy. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research,
Practice, Training, 42(3), 374--383. Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M.
C., Mazziotta, J. C., & Lenzi, G. L. (2003). Neural mechanisms of
empathy in humans: A relay from neural

systems for imitation to limbic areas. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 100, 5497--5502. Carswell, S. (1993). The
potential for treating neurodegenerative disorders with NGF-inducing
compounds. Experimental Neurology, 124, 36--42. Carvey, P. M. (1998).
Drug action in the central nervous system. New York: Oxford University
Press. Casey, B. J., Castellanos, F. X., & Giedd, J. N. (1997).
Implications of right frontostriatal circuitry in response inhibition
and attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 374--383. Casey, B. J.,
Galvan, A., & Hare, T. A. (2005). Changes in cerebral functional
organization during cognitive development. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 15, 239--244. Castellanos, F. X., Lee, P., Sharp, W.,
Jeffries, N., Greenstein, D., Clasen, L., et al. (2002). Developmental
trajectories of brain volume abnormalities in children and adolescents
with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. American Medical
Association Journal, 288, 1740--1748. Castelli, F., Glaser, D. E., &
Butterworth, B. (2006). Discrete and analogue quantity processing in the
parietal lobe: A functional MRI study. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 4693--4698. Ceci, S., & Bruch, M. (1993).
Suggestibility of the child witness: A historical review and synthesis.
Psychological Bulletin, 113, 403--439. Chambers, R. A., Bremner, J. D.,
Moghaddam, B., Southwick, S. M., Charney, D. S., & Krystal, J. H.
(1999). Glutamate and posttraumatic stress disorder: Toward a
psychobiology of dissociation. Seminars in Clinical Neuropsychiatry,
4(4), 274--281. Chaminade, T., & Decety, J. (2002). Leader or follower?
Involvement of the inferior parietal lobule in agency. NeuroReport, 13,
1975--1978. Champagne, D., Bagot, R., Hasselt, F., Meaney, M., Kloet,
E., Joels, M., et al. (2008). Maternal care and hippocampal plasticity:
Evidence for experience-dependent structural plasticity, altered
synaptic function, and differential responsiveness to glucocorticoids
and stress. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 6037--6045. Champagne, F.,
Diorio, J., Sharma, S., & Meaney, M. J. (2001). Naturally occurring
variations in maternal behavior in the rat are associated

with differences in estrogen-inducible central oxytocin receptors.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 98, 12736--12741.
Champagne, F. A., Francis, D. D., Mar, A., & Meaney, M. J. (2003).
Variations in maternal care in the rat as a mediating influence for the
effects of environment on development. Physiology and Behavior, 79,
359--371. Champagne, F., Ian, C., Weaver, G., Diorio, J., Dymov, S.,
Szyf, M., et al. (2006). Maternal care associated with methylation of
the estrogen receptor-a1b promoter and estrogen receptor-a expression in
the medial preoptic area of female offspring. Endocrinology, 147,
2909--2915. Chapman, L. F., Walter, R. D., Markham, C. H., Rand, R. W.,
& Crandall, P. H. (1967). Memory changes induced by stimulation of
hippocampus or amygdala in epilepsy patients with implanted electrodes.
Transactions of the American Neurological Association, 92, 50--56.
Charnov, E. L., & Berrigan, D. (1993). Why do female primates have such
long lifespans and so few babies? Or life in the slow lane. Evolutionary
Anthropology, 1, 191--194. Chavez, C. M., McGaugh, J. L., & Weinberger,
N. M. (2009). The basolateral amygdala modulates specific sensory memory
representations in the cerebral cortex. Neurobiology of Learning of
Memory, 91, 382--392. Cheng, D. T., Knight, D. C., Smith, C. N., &
Helmstetter, F. J. (2006). Human amygdala activity during the expression
of fear responses. Behavioral Neuroscience, 120, 1187--1195. Chiron, C.,
Jambaque, I., Nabbout, R., Lounes, R., Syrota, A., & Dulac, O. (1997).
The right brain is dominant in human infants. Brain, 120, 1057-- 1065.
Chochon, F., Cohen, L., Demoortele, S., & Dehaene, S. (1999).
Differential contributions of the left and right parietal lobules to
number processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(6), 617--630.
Christakou, A., Robbins, T. W., & Everitt, B. J. (2004). Prefrontal
cortical-ventral striatal interactions involved in affective modulation
of attentional performance: Implications for corticostriatal circuit
function. Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 773--780. Christensen, A. J.,
Edwards, D. L., Wiebe, J. S., Benotsch, E. G., McKelvey, L., Andrews,
M., et al. (1996). Effect of verbal self-disclosure on natural killer
cell activity: Moderating influence of cynical hostility. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 58, 150--155.

Christensen, H., Henderson, A. S., Griffiths, K., & Levings, C. (1997).
Does ageing inevitably lead to declines in cognitive performance? A
longitudinal study of elite academics. Personality and Individual
Differences, 23, 67--78. Christman, S. D. (1994). The many sides of the
two sides of the brain. Brain and Cognition, 26, 91--98. Christodoulou,
G. N., & Malliara-Loulakaki, S. (1981). Delusional misidentification
syndromes and cerebral "dysrhythmia." Psychiatrica Clinica, 14,
245--251. Chugani, H. T. (1998). A critical period of brain development:
Studies of cerebral glucose utilization with PET. Preventive Medicine,
27, 184--188. Chugani, H. T., & Phelps, M. E. (1991). Imaging human
brain development with positron emission tomography. Journal of Nuclear
Medicine, 32, 23--26. Chugani, H. T., Phelps, M. E., & Mazziotta, J. C.
(1987). Positron emission tomography study of human brain functional
development. Annals of Neurology, 22, 487--497. Claeys, K. G., Lindsey,
D. T., De Schutter, E., & Orban, G. A. (2003). A higher order motion
region in human inferior parietal lobule: Evidence from fMRI. Neuron,
40, 631--642. Classen, J., Liepert, J., Wise, S. P., Hallett, M., &
Cohen, L. G. (1998). Rapid plasticity of human cortical movements
representation induced by practice. Journal of Neurophysiology, 79,
1117--1123. Clovis, C., Pollock, J., Goodman, R., Impey, S., Dunn, J.,
Mandel, G., et al. (2005). Epigenetic mechanisms and gene networks in
the nervous system. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 10379--10389. Coan, J.
A., Allen, J. B., & Harmon-Jones, E. (2001). Voluntary facial expression
and hemispheric asymmetry over the frontal cortex. Psychophysiology, 38,
912--925. Coan, J. A., Schaefer, H. S., & Davidson, R. J. (2006).
Lending a hand: Social regulation of the neural response to threat.
Psychological Science, 17, 1032--1039. Cobb, S. (1944). Foundations of
neuropsychiatry. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins. Coccaro, E. F.,
Siever, L. J., Klar, H. M., & Maurer, G. (1989). Serotonergic studies in
patients with affective and personality disorders. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 46, 587--598.

Cogill, S. R., Caplan, H. L., Alexandra, H., Robson, K. M., & Kumar, R.
(1986). Impact of maternal postnatal depression on cognitive development
of young children. British Medical Journal, 292, 1165--1167. Cohen, R.
A., Grieve, S., Hoth, K. F., Paul, R. H., Sweet, L., Tate, D., et
al. (2006). Early life stress and morphometry of the adult anterior
cingulate cortex and caudate nuclei. Biological Psychiatry, 59(10),
975--982. Colby, C. L. (1998). Action-oriented spatial reference frames
in cortex. Neuron, 20, 15--24. Colby, C. L., & Goldberg, M. E. (1999).
Space and attention in parietal cortex. Annual Review of Neuroscience,
22, 319--349. Collette, J., Millam, R., Klasing, K., & Wakenell, P.
(2000). Neonatal handling of Amazon parrots alters the stress response
and immune function. Applied Animal Behavior Science, 66, 335--349.
Compton, D. M., Bachman, L. D., Brand, D., & Avet, T. L. (2000).
Age-associated changes in cognitive function in highly educated adults:
Emerging myths and realities. International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 15, 75--85. Condren, R. M., & Thakore, J. H. (2001).
Cushing's disease and melancholia. Stress, 4, 91--119. Conrad, C. D.,
Lupien, S. J., & McEwen, B. S. (1999). Support for a bimodal role for
type II adrenal steroid receptors in spatial memory. Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory, 72, 39--46. Coplan, J. D., & Lydiard, R. B. (1998).
Brain circuits in panic disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 44, 1264--1276.
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. (2002). Control of goal-directed and
stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3,
201--215. Corcoran, K. A., & Quirk, G. J. (2007). Activity in prelimbic
cortex is necessary for the expression of learned, but not innate,
fears. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 840--844. Coren, S., & Porac, C.
(1977). Fifty centuries of right-handedness: The historical record.
Science, 198, 631--632. Corina, D. P., Vaid, J., & Bellugi, U. (1992).
The linguistic basis of left hemisphere specialization. Science, 255,
1258--1260. Cornette, L., Dupont, P., Salmon, E., & Orban, G. (2001).
The neural substrate of orientation working memory. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 13, 813--828.

Corrigan, F. (2004). Psychothrapy as assisted homeostasis: Activation of
emotional processing mediated by the anterior cingulate cortex. Medical
Hypothesis, 63, 968--973. Costela, C., Tejedor-Real, P., &
Gibert-Rahola, A. (1995). Effects of neonatal handling on learned
helplessness model of depression. Physiology and Behavior, 57(2),
407--410. Coutinho, S. V., Plotsky, P. M., Sablad, M., Miller, J. C.,
Zhou, H., Bayati, A. I., et al. (2002). Neonatal maternal separation
alters stressinduced responses to viscerosomatic nociceptive stimuli in
rat. American Journal of Physiology Gastrointestinal and Liver
Physiology, 282, G307-- G316. Cowan, W. M., & Kandel, E. R. (2001). A
brief history of synapses and synaptic transmission. In W. M. Cowan, T.
C. Sudhof, & C. F. Stevens (Eds.), Synapses (pp. 1--88). Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press. Cozolino, L. J. (1997). The intrusion of
early implicit memory into adult consciousness. Dissociation, 10,
44--53. Cozolino, L. J. (2006). The neuroscience of human relationships:
Attachment and the developing social brain. New York: Norton. Cozolino,
L. J. (2008). The healthy aging brain: Sustaining attachment, attaining
wisdom. New York: Norton. Crick, F. (1994). The astonishing hypothesis:
The scientific search for the soul. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.
Critchley, H. (2005). Neural mechanism of autonomic, affective, and
cognitive integration. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 493, 154--166.
Critchley, H., Daly, E., Phillips, M., Brammer, M., Bullmore, E.,
Williams, S., et al. (2000). Explicit and implicit mechanisms for
processing of social information from facial expressions: A functional
magnetic resonance imaging study. Human Brain Mapping, 9, 93--105.
Critchley, H. D., Melmed, R. N., Featherstone, E., Mathias, C. J., &
Dolan, R. J. (2002). Volitional control of autonomic arousal: A
functional magnetic resonance study. NeuroImage, 16, 909--919.
Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Öhman, A., & Solan, R. J.
(2004). Neural systems supporting interoceptive awareness. Nature
Neuroscience, 7, 189--195. Crittenden, P. M., & DiLalla, D. L. (1988).
Compulsive compliance: The development of an inhibitory coping strategy
in infancy. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 16, 585--599.

Crowell, J. A., Treboux, D., & Waters, E. (2002). Stability of
attachment representations: The transition to marriage. Developmental
Psychology, 38, 467--479. Culham, J. C., & Kanwisher, N. G. (2001).
Neuroimaging of cognitive functions in human parietal cortex. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 11, 157--163. Cummings, J. L. (1993).
Frontal-subcortical circuits and human behavior. Archives of Neurology,
50, 873--880. Cummings, J. L., & Frankel, M. (1985). Gilles de la
Tourette syndrome and the neurological basis of obsessions and
compulsions. Biological Psychiatry, 20, 117--126. Cutting, J. (1992).
The role of the right hemisphere in psychiatric disorders. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 583--588. Czéh, B., Müller-Keuker, J. I. H.,
Rygula, R., Abumaria, N., Hiemke, C., Domenici, E., et al. (2007).
Chronic social stress inhibits cell proliferation in the adult medial
prefrontal cortex: Hemispheric asymmetry and reversal by fluoxetine
treatment. Neuropsychopharmacology, 32, 1490-- 1503. Dalla, C.,
Bangasser, D. A., Edgecomb, C., & Shors, T. J. (2007). Neurogenesis and
learning: Acquiring and asymptotic performance predict how many cells
survive in the hippocampus. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 88,
143--148. Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes' error. New York: Putnam and
Sons. Damasio, A. R., Grabowski, T. J., Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Ponto,
L. L.B., Parvizi, J., et al. (2000). Subcortical and cortical brain
activity during the feeling of self-generated emotions. Nature
Neuroscience, 3, 1049--1056. Daskalakis, Z. J., Christensen, B. K.,
Fitzgerald, P. B., & Chen, R. (2002). Transcranial magnetic stimulation:
A new investigational and treatment tool in psychiatry. Journal of
Neuropsychiatry Clinical Neuroscience, 14, 406--415. Davidson, R. J.
(1999). The neurobiology of personality and personality disorders. In D.
S. Charney, E. J. Nestler, & B. S. Bunney (Eds.), Neurobiology of mental
illness (pp. 841--854). New York: Oxford University Press. Davidson, R.
J. (2000). Affective style, psychopathology, and resilience: Brain
mechanisms and plasticity. American Psychologist, 55, 1196--1214.

Davidson, R. J. (2002). Anxiety and affective style: Role of prefrontal
cortex and amygdala. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 68--80. Davidson, R. J.
(2004). Well-being and affective style: Neural substrates and
biobehavioural correlates. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society: Biological Sciences, 359, 1395--1411. Davidson, R. J., Ekman,
P., Saron, C. D., Senulis, J. A., & Friesen, W. V. (1990).
Approach-withdrawal and cerebral asymmetry: Emotional expression and
brain physiology I. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58,
330--341. Davidson, R. J., & Fox, N. A. (1982). Asymmetrical brain
activity discriminates between positive and negative affective stimuli
in human infants. Science, 218, 1235--1237. Davidson, R. J., & Fox, N.
A. (1989). Frontal brain asymmetry predicts infants' response to
maternal separation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 98, 127--131.
Davidson, R. J., Irwin, W., Anderle, M. J., & Kalin, N. H. (2003). The
neural substrates of affective processing in depressed patients treated
with venlafaxine. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 64--75. Davidson,
R. J., Jackson, D. C., & Kalin, N. H. (2000). Emotion, plasticity,
context, regulation: Perspectives from affective neuroscience.
Psychological Bulletin, 126, 890--909. Davidson, R. J., Kabat-Zinn, J.,
Schumacher, J., Rosenkranz, M., Muller, D., Santorelli, S. F., et
al. (2003). Alterations in brain and immune function produced by
mindfulness meditation. Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 564--570. Davis, M.
(1992). The role of the amygdala in fear and anxiety. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 15, 353--375. Davis, M. (1997). Neurobiology of fear
responses: The role of the amygdala. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and
Clinical Neurosciences, 9, 382-- 402. Davis, M. (1998). Are different
parts of the extended amygdala involved in fear versus anxiety?
Biological Psychiatry, 44, 1239--1247. Davis, M., Myers, K. M.,
Chhatwal, J., & Ressler, K. J. (2006). Pharmacological treatments that
facilitate extinction of fear: Relevance to psychotherapy. Journal of
the American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics, 3, 82--96.

De Bellis, M. D., Baum, A. S., Birmaher, B., Keshavan, M. S., Eccard, C.
H., Boring, A. M., et al. (1999). Developmental traumatology part I:
Biological stress systems. Biological Psychiatry, 45, 1259--1270. De
Bellis, M. D., Keshavan, M. S., Clark, D. B., Casey, B. J., Giedd, J.
N., Boring, A. M., et al. (1999). Developmental traumatology part II:
Brain development. Biological Psychiatry, 45, 1271--1284. de Casper, A.
J., & Fifer, W. P. (1980). Of human bonding: Newborns prefer their
mother's voices. Science, 208, 1174--1176. Decety, J. (1994). Mapping
motor representations with positron emission tomography. Nature, 371,
600--602. Decety, J., Chaminade, T., Grèzes, J., & Meltzoff, A. N.
(2002). A PET exploration of the neural mechanisms involved in
reciprocal imitation. NeuroImage, 15, 265--272. Decety, J.. & Lamm, C.
(2006). Human empathy through the lens of social neuroscience.
Scientific World Journal, 6, 1146--1163. Dehaene, S., Molko, N., Cohen,
L., & Wilson, A. J. (2004). Arithmetic and the brain. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 14, 218--224. Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Cohen,
L. (2003). Three parietal circuits for number processing. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 20(3), 487-- 506. de Lanerolle, N. C., Kim, J. H.,
Robbins, R. J., & Spencer, D. D. (1989). Hippocampal interneuron loss
and plasticity in human temporal lobe epilepsy. Brain Research, 495,
387--395. Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness explained. Boston:
Little, Brown. Derryberry, D., & Reed, M. A. (2002). Anxiety-related
attentional biases and their regulation by attentional control. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 111(2), 225--236. DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S.
D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, R. C., Young, P.R., Salomon, R. M., et
al. (2005). Cognitive therapy vs. medications in the treatment of
moderate to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62,
409--416. Desimone, R. (1991). Face-selective cells in the temporal
cortex of monkeys. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 3, 1--8. Devinsky,
O. (2000). Right cerebral hemisphere dominance for a sense of corporeal
and emotional self. Epilepsy and Behavior, 1, 60--73. Devinsky, O.,
Morrell, M. J., & Vogt, B. A. (1995). Contributions of anterior
cingulate cortex to behavior. Brain, 118, 279--306.

De Waal, F. (1989). Peacemaking among primates. New York: Penguin Books.
Diamond, D. M., Bennett, M. C., Fleshner, M., & Rose, G. M. (1992).
Inverted-U relationships between the level of peripheral corticosterone
and the magnitude of hippocampal primed burst potentiation. Hippocampus,
2(4), 421--430. Diamond, M. C., Krech, D., & Rosenweig, M. R. (1964).
The effects of enriched environment on the histology of the rat cerebral
cortex. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 123, 111--119. Diamond, M. C.,
Law, F., Rhodes, H., Lindner, B., Rosenweig, M. R., Krech, D., et
al. (1966). Increases of cortical depth and glia numbers in rats
subjected to enriched environments. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
128, 117--126. Diamond, M. C., Scheibel, A. B., Murphy, G. M., & Harvey,
T. (1985). On the brain of a scientist: Albert Einstein. Experimental
Neurology, 88, 198--204. Dias, R., Robbins, T. W., & Roberts, A. C.
(1996). Dissociation in prefrontal cortex of affective and attentional
shifts. Nature, 380, 69--72. Dimond, S. J., & Farrington, L. (1977).
Emotional response to films shown to the right or left hemisphere of the
brain measured by heart rate. Acta Psychologica, 41, 255--260. Diorio,
J., & Meaney, M. (2007). Maternal programming of defensive responses
through sustained effects on gene expression. Journal of Psychiatry and
Neuroscience, 32(4), 275--285. Dolan, R. J. (1999). On the neurology of
morals. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 927--929. Dolan, R. (2007). Keynote
address: Revaluing the orbital prefrontal cortex. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1121, 1--9. Dolcos, F., & McCarthy, G. (2006).
Brain systems mediating cognitive interference by emotional distraction.
Journal of Neuroscience. 26, 2072-- 2079. Domes, G., Rothfischer, J.,
Reichwald, U., & Hautzinger, M. (2005). Inverted-U function between
salivary cortisol and retrieval of verbal memory after hydrocortisone
treatment. Behavioral Neuroscience, 119(2), 512--517. Dougherty, D. D.,
Rauch, S. L., Deckerbach, T., Marci, C., Loh, R., Shin, L.M., et
al. (2004). Ventromedial prefrontal cortex and amygdala

dysfunction during an anger induction positron emission tomography study
in patients with major depressive disorder with anger attacks. Archives
of General Psychology, 61, 795--804. Dougherty, R. F., Ben-Shachar, M.,
Deutsch, G. K., Hernandez, A., Fox, G.R., & Wandell, B. A. (2007).
Temporal-callosal pathway diffusivity predicts phonological skills in
children. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 104,
8556--8561. Douglas, R. J. (1967). The hippocampus and behavior.
Psychological Bulletin, 67, 416--442. Douglas, R. J., & Pribram, K. H.
(1966). Learning and limbic lesions. Neuropsychologia, 4, 197--220.
Drake, R. A. (1984). Lateral asymmetry of personal optimism. Journal of
Research in Personality, 18, 497--507. Drake, R. A., & Seligman, M. E.
P. (1989). Self--serving biases in causal attributions as a function of
altered activation asymmetry. International Journal of Neuroscience, 45,
199--204. Dranovsky, A., & Hen, R. (2006). Hippocampal neurogenesis:
Regulation by stress and antidepressants. Biological Psychiatry, 59,
1136-- 1143. Drevets, W. C. (1998). Functional neuroimaging studies of
depression: The anatomy of melancholia. Annual Review of Medicine, 49,
341--361. Drevets, W. C., & Raichle, M. E. (1998). Reciprocal
suppression of regional cerebral blood during emotional versus higher
cognitive processes: Implications for interactions between emotion and
cognition. Cognition and Emotion, 12(3), 353--385. Driver, J., &
Mattingley, J. B. (1998). Parietal neglect and visual awareness. Nature
Neuroscience, 1(1), 17--22. Dudai, Y. (2006). Reconsolidation: The
advantage of being refocused. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 16,
174--178. Dunbar, R. I. (1996). Grooming, gossip, and the evolution of
language. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Durston, S., Tottenham,
N. T., Thomas, K. M., Davidson, M. C., Eigsti, I., Yang, Y., et
al. (2003). Differential patterns of striatal activation in young
children with and without ADHD. Biological Psychiatry, 53, 871--878.
Dwivedi, Y., Rizavi, H. S., Conley, R. R., Roberts, R. C., Tamminga, C.
A., & Pandey, G. N. (2003). Altered gene expression of brain-derived

neurotrophic factor and receptor tyrosine kinase B in postmortem brain
of suicide subjects. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 804--815.
Eales, L. A. (1985). Song learning in zebra finches: Some effects of
song model availability on what is learnt and when. Animal Behavior, 37,
507--508. Edelman, G. M. (1987). Neural Darwinism. New York: Basic
Books. Edelman, G. M. (1989). The remembered present: A biological
theory of consciousness. New York: Basic Books. Edin, F., Macoveanu, J.,
Olesen, P., Tegner, J., & Klingberg, T. (2007). Stronger synaptic
connectivity as a mechanism behind development of working memory-related
brain activity during childhood. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
19(5), 750--760. Egeland, B., & Farber, E. A. (1984). Infant-mother
attachment: Factors related to its development and changes over time.
Child Development, 55, 753--771. Eichenbaum, H. (1992). The hippocampal
system and declarative memory in animals. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 4, 217--231. Eisenberg, L. (1995). The social construction
of the human brain. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1563--1575.
Ekman, P., & Davidson, R. J. (1993). Voluntary smiling changes regional
brain activity. Psychological Science, 4, 342--347. Elbert, T., Flor,
H., Birbaumer, N., Knecht, S., Hampson, S., Larbig, W., et al. (1994).
Extensive reorganization of the somatosensory cortex in adult humans
after nervous system injury. NeuroReport, 5, 2593--2597. Elbert, T.,
Pantev, C., Wienbruch, C., Rockstroh, B., & Taub, E. (1995). Increased
cortical representation of the fingers of the left hand in string
players. Science, 270, 305--307. Eliot, L. (1999). What's going on in
there? How the brain and mind develop in the first five years of life.
New York: Bantam Books. Ellenberger, H. F. (1970). The discovery of the
unconscious. New York: Basic Books. Elliott, R., Agnew, Z., & Deakin, J.
(2008). Medial orbitofrontal cortex codes relative rather than absolute
value of financial rewards in humans. European Journal of Neuroscience,
77, 2213--2218. Elliott, R., Friston, K. J., & Dolan, R. J. (2000).
Dissociable neural responses in human reward systems. Journal of
Neuroscience, 20, 6159-- 6165.

Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. Secaucus, NJ:
Lyle Stuart. Elvander-Tottie, E., Eriksson, T. M., Sandin, J., & Ögren,
S. O. (2006) N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors in the medial septal area
have a role in spatial and emotional learning in the rat. Neuroscience,
142(4), 963--978. Encinas, J. M., Vaahtokari, A., & Enikolopov, G.
(2006). Fluoxetine targets early progenitor cells in the adult brain.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 8233--8238.
Eriksson, P. S., Perfileva, E., Bjork-Eriksson, T., Alborn, A. M.,
Nordborg, C., Peterson, D. A., et al. (1998). Neurogenesis in the adult
human hippocampus. Nature Medicine, 4, 1313--1317. Esch, T., & Stefano,
G. B. (2005). The neurobiology of love. Neuroendocrinology Letters,
26(3), 175--192. Eslinger, P. J. (1998). Neurological and
neuropsychological bases of empathy. European Neurology, 39, 193--199.
Etchison, M., & Kleist, D. (2000). Review of narrative therapy: Research
and utility. The Family Journal, 8(1), 61--66. Etkin, A., Phil, M.,
Pittenger, C., Polan, H. J., & Kandel, E. R. (2005). Toward a
neurobiology of psychotherapy: Basic science and clinical applications.
Journal of Neuropsychiatry Clinical Neuroscience, 17, 145-- 158. Falkai,
P., & Bogerts, B. (1986). Cell loss in the hippocampus of
schizophrenics. European Archives of Psychiatry and Neurological
Sciences, 236, 154--161. Federspiel, A., Volpe, U., Horn, H., Dierks,
T., Franck, A., Vannini, P., et al. (2005). Motion standstill leads to
activation of inferior parietal lobe. Human Brain Mapping, 27, 340--349.
Feinberg, T. E., & Shapiro, R. M. (1989). Misidentificationreduplication
and the right hemisphere. Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and
Behavioral Neurology, 2, 39--48. Feldman, R., Greenbaum, C. W., &
Yirimiya, N. (1999). Mother-infant affect synchrony as an antecedent of
the emergence of self-control. Developmental Psychology, 35, 223--231.
Fellin, T., Pascual, O., & Haydon, P. G. (2006). Astrocytes coordinate
synaptic networks: Balanced excitation and inhibition. Physiology, 21,
208-- 215.

Fernandes, C. C., Pinto-Duarte, A., Ribeiro, J. A., & Sebastião, A. M.
(2008). Postsynaptic action of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
attenuates 7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-mediated responses in
hippocampal internerons. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 5611--5618. Fias,
W., Lammertyn, J., Caessens, B., & Orban, G. (2007). Processing of
abstract knowledge in the horizontal segment of the intraparietal
sulcus. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 8952--8957. Fias, W., Lammertyn,
J., Reynvoet, B., Dupont, P., & Orban, G. (2003). Parietal
representation of symbolic and nonsymbolic magnitude. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(1), 47--56. Field, T. M. (1997). The
treatment of depressed mothers and their infants. In L. Murry & P. J.
Cooper (Eds.), Postpartum depression and child development
(pp. 221--236). New York: Guilford. Field, T., & Diego, M. (2008a).
Cortisol: The culprit prenatal stress variable. International Journal of
Neuroscience, 118, 1181--1205. Field, T., & Diego, M. (2008b). Maternal
depression effects on infant frontal EEG asymmetry. International
Journal of Neuroscience, 118, 1081-- 1108. Field, T., Diego, M., &
Hernandez-Reif, M. (2006). Prenatal depression effects on the fetus and
newborn: A review. Infant Behavior and Development, 29, 445--455. Field,
T. M., Gizzle, N., Scafidi, F., Abrams, S., Richardson, S., Kuhn, C., et
al. (1996). Massage therapy for infants of depressed mothers. Infant
Behavior and Development, 19, 107--112. Field, T. M., Healy, B.,
Goldstein, S., & Guthertz, M. (1990). Behaviorstate matching and
synchrony in mother-infant interactions of nondepressed versus depressed
dyads. Developmental Psychology, 26, 7--14. Field, T. M., Healy, B.,
Goldstein, S., Perry, S., & Bendell, D. (1988). Infants of depressed
mothers show "depressed" behavior even with nondepressed adults. Child
Development, 59, 1569--1579. Field, T. M., Woodson, R., Greenberg, R., &
Cohen, D. (1982). Discrimination and imitation of facial expressions by
neonates. Science, 218, 179--181. Figiel, G. S., Epstein, C., McDonald,
W. M., Amazon-Leece, J., Figiel, L., Saldivia, A., et al. (1998). The
use of rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) in refractory
depression. Journal of Clinical Neuropsychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences, 10, 20--25.

Fine, M. L. (1989). Embryonic, larval and adult development of the sonic
neuromuscular system in the oyster toadfish. Brain, Behavior and
Evolutions, 34, 13--24. Fischer, K. W. (1987). Relations between brain
and cognitive development. Child Development, 58, 623--632. Fischer, K.
W., Shaver, P. R., & Carnochan, P. (1990). How emotions develop and how
they organize development. Cognition and Emotion, 4, 81--127. Fish, E.
W., Shahrokh, D., Bagot, R., Caldji, C., Bredy, T., Szyf, M., et
al. (2004). Epigenetic programming of stress responses through
variations in maternal care. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
1036, 167-- 180. Fisher, H. E. (1998). Lust, attraction, and attachment
in mammalian reproduction. Human Nature, 9, 23--52. Fisher, H. E.
(2004). Why we love: The nature and chemistry of romantic love. New
York: Holt Paperbacks. Fisher, P. M., Meltzer, C. C., Ziolko, S. K.,
Price, J. C., Moses-Kolko, E. L., Berga, S. L., et al. (2006). Capacity
for 5-HT1A---mediated autoregulation predicts amygdala reactivity.
Nature Neuroscience, 9(11), 1362--1363. Fish-Murry, C. C., Koby, E. V.,
& van der Kolk, B. A. (1987). Evolving ideas: The effects of abuse on
children's thought. In B. A. van der Kolk (Ed.), Psychological trauma
(pp. 89--110). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Fleming, A.
S., & Korsmit, M. (1996). Plasticity in the maternal circuit: Effects of
maternal experience on Fos-lir in hypothalamic, limbic, and cortical
structures in the postpartum rat. Behavioral Neuroscience, 110,
567--582. Fonagy, P., Gergely, G., Jurist, E., & Target, M. (2002).
Affect regulation, mentalization, and the development of self. New York:
Other Press. Fonagy, P., Steele, H., & Steele, M. (1991). Maternal
representations of attachment during pregnancy predict the organization
of infant-mother attachment at one year of age. Child Development, 62,
891--905. Fonagy, P., Steele, M., Steele, H., Moran, G. S., & Higgitt,
A. C. (1991). The capacity to understand mental states: The reflective
self in parent and

child and its significance for security of attachment. Infant Mental
Health Journal, 12, 201--218. Forbes, E. E., Shaw, D. S., Silk, J. S.,
Feng, X., Cohn, J. F., Fox, N. A., et al. (2008). Children's affect
expression and frontal EEG asymmetry: Transactional associations with
mothers' depressive symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 36,
207--221. Fowler, C. D., Liu, Y., Ouimet, C., & Wang, Z. (2002). The
effects of social environment on adult neurogenesis in the female
prairie vole. Journal of Neurobiology, 51, 115--128. Fox, M. D., Snyder,
A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D. C., & Raichle, M. E.
(2005). The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic,
anticorrelated functional networks. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA, 102, 9673--9678. Fox, N. A. (1991). If it's not left
it's right: Electroencephalograph asymmetry and the development of
emotion. American Psychologist, 46, 863--872. Fox, N. A., & Davidson, R.
J. (1986). Taste-elicited changes in facial signs of emotion and the
assymetry of brain electrical activity in human newborns.
Neuropsychologia, 24, 417--422. Fox, N. A., & Davidson, R. J. (1988).
Patterns of brain electrical activity during facial signs of emotion in
10-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology, 24, 230--236. Francis,
D., Diorio, J., Plotsky, P., & Meaney, M. (2002). Environmental
enrichment reverses the effects of maternal separation on stress
reactivity. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 7840--7843. Frank, J. (1963).
Persuasion and healing. New York: Schoken Books. Freedman, L. J., Insel,
T. R., & Smith, Y. (2000). Subcortical projections of area 25 (subgenual
cortex) of the macaque monkey. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 421(2),
172--188. Freeman, T. W., & Kimbrell, T. (2001). A "cure" for chronic
combatrelated posttraumatic stress disorder secondary to a right frontal
lobe infarct: A case report. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences, 13, 106--109. Freud, S. (1968). Project for a scientific
psychology. In J. Strachey (Ed.), New introductory lectures on
psychoanalysis: Standard edition of the complete psychological works of
Sigmund Freud (Vol. 22), pp. 3--182). London: Hogarth Press. (Original
work published in 1895).

Freud, S. (1975). The dynamics of transference. In J. Strachey (Ed.),
The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund
Freud (Vol. 12, pp. 99--108). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work
publlished in 1912). Frey, S., & Petrides, M. (2000). Orbitofrontal
cortex: A key prefrontal region for encoding information. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 97(15), 8723--8727 Freyd, J. J.
(1987). Dynamic mental representations. Psychological Reviews, 94,
427--438. Friberg, L., Olsen, T. S., Roland, P. E., Paulsen, O. B., &
Lassen, N. A. (1985). Focal increase of blood flow in the cerebral
cortex of man during vestibular stimulation. Brain, 108, 609--623.
Fricchione, G., & Stefano, G. B. (2005). Placebo neural systems: Nitric
oxide, morphine and the dopamine brain reward and motivation
circuitries. Medical Science Monitor, 11(5), MS54--65. Frick, R. B.
(1982). The ego and the vestibulocerebellar system: Some theoretical
perspectives. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 51, 93--122. Fuente-Fernández,
R., Ruth, T. J., Sossi, V., Schulzer, M., Calne, D. B., & Stoessl, A. J.
(2001). Expectation and dopamine release: Mechanism of the placebo
effect in Parkinson's disease. Science, 293, 1164--1166. Fujikawa, T.,
Soya, H., Fukuoka, H., Alam, K. S. M., Yoshizato, H., McEwan, B. S., et
al. (2000). A biphasic regulation of receptor mRNA expressions for
growth hormone, glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid in the rat dentate
gyrus during acute stress. Brain Research, 874, 186--193. Furmark, T.,
Tillfors, M., Marteinsdottir, I., Fischer, H., Pissiota, A., Långström,
B., et al. (2002). Common changes in cerebral blood flow in patients
with social phobia treated with citalopram or cognitive-behavioral
therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 425--433. Fuster, J. M.
(1996). Frontal lobe and the cognitive foundation of behavioral action.
In A. R. Damasio, H. Damasio, & Y. Christen (Eds.), Neurobiology of
decision-making (pp. 47--61). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. Fuster, J. M.
(1997). The prefrontal cortex. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven. Fuster, J.
M. (2004). Upper processing stages of the perception-action cycle.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 8(4), 143--145. Fuster, J. M., Bonder, M.,
& Kroger, J. K. (2000). Cross-modal and cross-temporal association in
neurons of frontal cortex. Nature, 405, 347--

351. Gablik, S. (1985). Magritte. New York: Thames and Hudson. Gainotti,
G. (1972). Emotional behavior and hemispheric side of the lesion.
Cortex, 8, 41--55. Galin, D. (1974). Implications for psychiatry of left
and right cerebral specialization: A neurophysiological context for
unconscious processes. Archives of General Psychiatry, 31, 572--583.
Galin, D., Johnstone, J., Nakell, L., & Herron, J. (1979). Development
for the capacity for tactile information transfer between hemispheres in
normal children. Science, 204, 1330--1331. Gallagher, M., McMahon, R.
W., & Schoenbaum, G. (1999). Orbitofrontal cortex and representation of
incentive value in associative learning. Journal of Neuroschince, 19,
6610--6614. Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G.
(1996). Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain, 119, 593--609.
Galynker, I. I., Cai, J., Ongseng, F., Fineston, H., Dutta, E., &
Serseni, D. (1998). Hypofrontality and negative symptoms in major
depressive disorder. Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 39, 608--612. Ganis,
G., Kosslyn, S. M., Stose, S., Thompson, W. L., & YurgelunTodd, D.A.
(2003). Neural correlates of different types of deception: An fMRI
investigation. Cerebral Cortex, 13, 830--836. Garavan, H., Ross, T. J.,
& Stein, E. A. (1999). Right hemisphere dominance of inhibitory control:
An event-related functional MRI study. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 96, 8301--8306. Garoflos, E., Stamatakis, A.,
Pondiki, S., Apostolou, A., Philippidis, H., & Sylianopoulou, F. (2007).
Cellular mechanism underlying the effect of a single exposure to
neonatal handling on neurotrophin-3 in the brain of 1day-old rats.
Neuroscience, 148, 349--358. Garoflos, E., Stamatakis, A., Rafrogianni,
A., Pondiki, S., & Sylianopoulou, F. (2008). Neonatal handling on the
first postnatal day leads to increased maternal behavior and fos levels
in the brain of the newborn rat. Developmental Psychobiology, 50(7),
704--713. Gartside, S. E., Leitch, M. M., McQuade, R., & Swarbrick, D.
J. (2003). Flattening the glucocorticoid rhythm causes changes in
hippocampal expression of messenger RNAs coding structural and
functional proteins: Implications for aging and depression.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 821--829.

Gauthier, I., Tarr, M. J., Moylan, J., Skudlarski, P., Gore, J. C., &
Anderson, A. W. (2000). The fusiform ''face area" is part of a network
that processes faces at the individual level. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 12, 495--504. Gazzaley, A., Rissman, J., Cooney, J.,
Aaron, R., Seibert, T., Clapp, W., et al. (2007). Functional
interactions between prefrontal and visual association cortex contribute
to top-down modulation of visual processing. Cerebral Cortex, 17,
i125--i135. Gazzaniga, M.S. (1989). Organization of the human brain.
Science, 245, 947--952. Gazzaniga, M. S. (1995). Consciousness and the
cerebral hemispheres. In M.S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The cognitive
neuroscience (pp.1391--1400). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Gazzaniga, M.
S., LeDoux, J. E., & Wilson, D. H. (1977). Language, praxis, and the
right hemisphere: Clues to some mechanisms of consciousness. Neurology,
27, 1144--1147. Geday, J., Kupers, R., & Gjedde, A. (2007). As time goes
by: Temporal constraints on emotional activation of inferior medial
prefrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 17, 2753--2759. Gedo, J. E. (1991).
The biology of clinical encounters: Psychoanalysis as a science of mind.
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press. Gehring, W. J., & Willoughby, A. R.
(2002). The medial frontal cortex and the rapid processing of monetary
gains and losses. Science, 295, 2279-- 2282. George, M. D., Wasserman,
M. D., Kimbrell, J. T., Little, M. D., Williams, W. E., Danielson, A.
L., et al. (1997). Mood improvement following daily left prefrontal
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in patients with
depression: A placebo-controlled crossover trial. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154, 1752--1756. Geschwind, N., & Galaburda, A. M. (1985).
Cerebral lateralization: Biological mechanisms, associations and
pathology: I. A hypothesis and a program for research. Archives of
Neurology, 42, 428--459. Geuze, E., Vermetten, E., & Bremner, J. D.
(2005). MR-based in vivo hippocampal volumetrics: 2. Findings in
neuropsychiatric disorders. Molecular Psychiatry, 10, 160--184.
Ghashghaei, H. T., & Barbas, H. (2002). Pathways for emotion:
Interactions of prefrontal and anterior temporal pathways in the
amygdala

of the rhesus monkey. Neuroscience, 115, 1261--1279. Ghashghaei, H. T.,
Hilgetag, C. C., & Barbas, H. (2007). Sequence of information processing
for emotions based on the anatomic dialogue between prefrontal cortex
and amygdala. NeuroImage, 34, 905--923. Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses
considered as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Gilbertson,
M. W., Shenon, M. E., Ciszewski, A., Kasai, K., Lasko, N. B., Orr, S.
P., et al. (2002). Smaller hippocampal volume predicts pathologic
vulnerability to psychological trauma. Nature Neuroscience, 5,
1242--1247. Gilboa, A., Shalev, A., Laor, L., Lester, H., Louzoun, Y.,
Chisin, R., et al. (2004). Functional connectivity of the prefrontal
cortex and the amygdala in posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 55, 263-- 272. Gilliland, B. E., & James, R. K. (1998).
Theories and strategies in counseling and psychotherapy. Boston: Allyn
and Bacon. Gitlin, M. J. (2007). The psychotherapist's guide to
psychopharmacology. New York: Free Press. Glaser, D. (2000). Child abuse
and neglect and the brain---A review. Journal of Child Psychiatry and
Allied Disciplines, 41, 97--116. Gloor, P. (1978). Inputs and outputs of
the amygdala: What the amygdala is trying to tell the rest of the brain.
In K. E. Livingston & O. Hornykiewicz (Eds.), Limbic mechanisms: The
continuing evolution of the limbic system concept (pp. 189--209). New
York: Plenum Press. Goel, V., & Dolan, R. J. (2003). Reciprocal neural
response within lateral and ventral medial prefrontal cortex during hot
and cold reasoning. NeuroImage, 20, 2314--2321. Goel, V., Grafman, J.,
Sadato, N., & Hallett, M. (1995). Modeling other minds. NeuroReport, 6,
1741--1746. Goldapple, K., Segal, Z., Garson, C., Lau, M., Bieling, P.,
Kennedy, S., et al. (2004). Modulation of cortical-limbic pathways in
major depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 34--41. Goldberg,
E., & Costa, L. D. (1981). Hemispheric differences in the acquisition
and use of descriptive systems. Brain and Language, 14, 144-- 173.
Goldman, P. S. (1971). Functional development of the prefrontal cortex
in early life and the problem of neural plasticity. Experimental
Neurology,

32, 366--387. Goldman, P. S., & Galkin, T. W. (1978). Prenatal removal
of frontal association cortex in the fetal rhesus monkey: Anatomical and
functional consequences in postnatal life. Brain Research, 152,
451--485. Goldstein, K. (1939). The organism: A holistic approach to
biology derived from pathological data in man. New York: American Books.
Goldstein, L. E., Rasmusson, A. M., Bunney, B. S., & Roth, R. H. (1996).
Role of the amygdala in the coordination of behavioral, neuroendocrine,
and prefrontal cortical monoamine responses to psychological stress in
the rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 4787--4798. Goleman, D. (2006).
Emotional Intelligence (10th ed.). New York: Bantam Books. Golomb, J.,
de Leon, M. J., Kluger, A., George, A. E., Tarshish, C., & Ferris, S. H.
(1993). Hippocampal atrophy in normal aging: An association with recent
memory impairment. Archives of Neurology, 50, 967--973. Goodman, R. R.,
Snyder, S. H., Kuhar, M. J., & Young, W. S., III. (1980). Differential
of delta and mu opiate receptor localizations by light microscope
autoradiography. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA,
77, 2167--2174. Gottfried, J. A., & Dolan, R. J. (2004). Human
orbitofrontal cortex mediates extinction learning while accessing
conditioned representations of value. Nature Neuroscience, 7,
1145--1153. Gottfried, J. A., O'Doherty, J., & Dolan, R. J. (2003).
Encoding predictive reward value in human amygdala and orbitofrontal
cortex. Science, 301, 1104--1107. Gould, E. (2007). How widespread is
adult neurogenesis in mammals? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 481--488.
Gould, E., McEwen, B. S., Tanapat, P., Galea, L. A. M., & Fuchs, E.
(1997). Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the adult tree shrew is
regulated by psychosocial stress and NMDA receptor activation. Journal
of Neuroscience, 17, 2492--2498. Gould, E., Reeves, A. J., Fallah, M.,
Tanapat, P., Gross, C. G., & Fuchs, E. (1999). Hippocampal neurogenesis
in adult old world primates. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 96, 5263--5267. Gould, E., Reeves, A. J., Graziano, M. S.
A., & Gross, C. G. (1999). Neurogenesis in the neocortex of adult
primates. Science, 628, 548--552.

Gould, E., Tanapat, P., Hastings, N. B., & Shors, T. J. (1999).
Neurogenesis in adulthood: A possible role in learning. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 3, 186--191. Gould, E., Woolley, C., & McEwan, B.
(1990). Short-term glucocorticoid manipulations affect neuronal
morphology and survival in the adult dentate gyrus. Neuroscience, 37,
367--375. Gould, S. J. (1977). Ontogeny and phylogeny. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press. Grafton, S. T., Arbib, M. A., Fadiga, L., & Rizzolatti,
G. (1996). Localization of grasp representations in humans by positron
emission tomography. 2: Observation compared with imagination.
Experimental Brain Research, 112, 103--111. Gray, J. R., Braver, T. S.,
& Raichle, M. E. (2002). Integration of emotion and cognition in the
lateral prefrontal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 99, 4115--4120. Green, A. (1978). Self-destructive
behavior in battered children. American Journal of Psychiatry, 135,
579--582. Green, A. (1981). Neurological impairments in maltreated
children. Child Abuse and Neglect, 5, 129--134. Greenough, W. T. (1987).
Experience effects on the developing and mature brain: Dendritic
branching and synaptogenesis. In N. A. Krasnegor, E. M. Blass, M. A.
Hofer, & W. P. Smotherman (Eds.), Perinatal development: A
psychobiological perspective (pp. 195--221). Orlando: Academic Press.
Grefkes, C., & Fink, G. R. (2005). The functional organization of the
intraparietal sulcus in humans and monkeys. Journal of Anatomy, 207, 3--
17. Griffiths, T. D., Rees, G., Rees, A., Green, G., Witton, C., Rowe,
D., et al. (1998). Right parietal cortex is involved in the perception
of sound movement in humans. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 74--79. Grisaru,
N., Chudakov, B., Yaroslavsky, Y., & Belmaker, R. H. (1998).
Transcranial magnetic stimulation in mania: A controlled study. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 1608--1610. Gross, C. G. (2000).
Neurogenesis in the adult brain: Death of a dogma. Nature Review of
Neuroscience, 1, 67--73. Güemes, I., Guillen, V., & Ballesteros, J.
(2008). Psychotherapy versus drug therapy in depression in outpatient
care. Actas Esp Psiquiatr, 36(5),

299--306. Gundel, H., Lopez-Sala, A., & Ceballos-Baumann, A. O. (2004).
Alexithymia correlates with the size of the right anterior cingulate.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 66, 132--140. Gunnar, M. R. (1992). Reactivity
of the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenocortical system to stressors in
normal infants and children. Pediatrics, 90(Suppl. 3), 491--479. Gunnar,
M. R. (1998). Quality of care and buffering of neuroendocrine stress
reactions: Potential effects on the developing human brain. Preventive
Medicine, 27, 208--211. Gunnar, M. R., & Stone, C. (1984). The effects
of positive maternal affect on infant responses to pleasant, ambiguous,
and fear-provoking toys. Child Development, 55, 1231--1236. Gurvits, T.
V., Gilbertson, M. W., Lasko, N. B., Tarhan, A. S., Simeon, D., Maclin,
M. L., et al. (2000). Neurological soft signs in chronic posttraumatic
stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 181--183. Gusnard,
D. A., Akbudak, E., Shulman, G. L., & Raichle, M. E. (2002). Medial
prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: Relation to a
default mode of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 98, 4259--4264. Guzowski, J. F., Setlow, B., Wagner, E.
K., & McGaugh, J. L. (2001). Experience-dependent gene expression in the
rat hippocampus after spatial learning: A comparison of the
immediate-early genes Arc, c-fos, and zif268. Journal of Neuroscience,
21, 5089--5098. Halassa, M. M., Fellin, T., & Haydon, P. G. (2007). The
tripartite synapse: Roles for gliotransmission in health and disease.
Trends in Molecular Medicine, 13(2), 54--63. Halgren, E., Dale, A. M.,
Sereno, M. I., Tootell, R. B. H., Marinkovic, K., & Rosen, B. R. (1999).
Location of human face-selective cortex with respect to retinotopic
areas. Human Brain Mapping, 7, 29--37. Halgren, E., Walter, R. D.,
Cherlow, D. G., & Crandall, P. H. (1978). Mental phenomena evoked by
electrical stimulation of the human hippocampal formation and amygdala.
Brain, 101, 83--117. Hamilton, C. E. (2000). Continuity and
discontinuity of attachment from infancy through adolescence. Child
Development, 71, 690--694. Hampden-Turner, C. (1981). Maps of the mind.
New York: Macmillan.

Hane, A., & Fox, N. (2006). Ordinary variations in maternal caregiving
influence human infants' stress reactivity. Psychological Science, 17,
550-- 556. Hardingham, G. E., & Bading, H. (2003). The yin and yang of
NMDA receptor signaling. Trends in Neurosciences, 26(2), 81--89. Hariri,
A. R., Bookheimer, S. Y., & Mazziotta, J. C. (2000). Modulating
emotional responses: Effects of a neocortical network on the limbic
system. NeuroReport, 11(1), 43--48. Hariri, A. R., Drabant, E. M., &
Weinberger, D. R. (2006). Imaging genetics: Perspectives from studies of
genetically driven variation in serotonin function and corticolimbic
affective processing. Biological Psychiatry, 59, 888--897. Hariri, A.
R., Mattay, V. S., Tessitore, A., Fera, F., & Weinberger, D. R. (2003).
Neocortical modulation of the amygdala response to fearful stimuli.
Biological Psychiatry, 53, 494--501. Harlow, J. (1868). Recovery from
the passage of an iron bar through the head. Publication of the
Massachusetts Medical Society, 2, 329--346. Harlow, H. F., & Suomi, S.
J. (1971). Social recovery by isolationreared monkeys. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 68, 1534--1538. Harmon-Jones, E.,
& Allen, J. J. B. (1998). Anger and frontal brain activity: EEG
asymmetry consistent with approach motivation despite negative affective
valence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1310--1316.
Harmon-Jones, E., & Sigelman, J. (2001). State anger and prefrontal
brain activity: Evidence that insult-related relative left-prefrontal
activation is associated with experienced anger and aggression. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(5), 797--803. Hasselmo, M. E.,
Rolls, E. T., & Baylis, G. C. (1989). The role of expression and
identity in the face-selective responses of neurons in the temporal
visual cortex of the monkey. Behavior Brain Research, 32, 203-- 218.
Hawkes, K., O'Connell, J. F., & Jones, N. G. B. (1997). Hadza women's
time allocation, offspring provisioning, and the evolution of long
postmenopausal life spans. Current Anthropology, 38, 551--577. Hazan,
C., & Shaver, P. R. (1990). Love and work: An attachmenttheoretical
perspective. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59,

270--280. Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior: A
neuropsychological theory. New York: Wiley. Heider, F. (1958). The
psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley. Heimer, L., &
Van Hoesen, G. W. (2006). The limbic lobe and its output channels:
Implications for emotional functions and adaptive behavior. Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 126--147. Heimer, L., Van Hoesen, G. W.,
Trimble, M., & Zahm, D. S. (2008). Anatomy of neuropsychiatry: The new
anatomy of the basal forebrain and its implications for neuropsychiatric
illness. Amsterdam: Academic Press. Heinz, A., Braus, D. F., Smolka, M.
N., Wrase, J., Puls, I., Hermann, D., et al. (2005). Amygdala-prefrontal
coupling depends on a genetic variation of the serotonin transporter.
Nature Neuroscience, 8(1), 20--21. Henry, R. R., Satz, P., & Saslow, E.
(1984). Early brain damage and the ontogenesis of functional asymmetry.
Early Brain Damage, 1, 253--275. Hensch, T. K. (2004). Critical period
regulation. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 549--579. Henson, R. N.
A., Shallice, T., & Dolan, R. J. (1999). Right prefrontal cortex and
episodic memory retrieval: A functional MRI test of the monitoring
hypothesis. Brain, 122, 1367--1381. Herman, B. A., & Panksepp, J.
(1978). Effects of morphine and naloxone on separation distress and
approach attachment: Evidence for opiate mediation of social effect.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 9, 213--220. Herman, J. L.
(1992). Complex PTSD: A syndrome in survivors of prolonged and repeated
trauma. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 5, 377--391. Herschkowitz, N.,
Kegan, J., & Zilles, K. (1997). Neurobiological basis of behavioral
development in the first year. Neuropediatrics, 28, 296--306. Hesse, E.
(1999). The adult attachment interview: Historical and current
perspectives. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of
attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 395--433).
New York: Guilford. Hirsten, W. & Ramachandran, V. S. (1997). Capgras
syndrome: A novel probe for understanding the neural representation of
the identity and familiarity of persons. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London: Biological Sciences, 264, 437--444.

Hodge, C. J., & Boakye, M. (2001). Biological plasticity: The future of
science in neurosurgery. Neurosurgery, 48, 2--16. Holtforth, M. G.,
Grawe, K., Egger, O., & Berking, M. (2005). Reducing the dreaded: Change
of avoidance motivation in psychotherapy. Psychotherapy Research, 15,
261--271. Holthoff, V. A., Beuthien-Baumann, B., Zündorf, G., Triemer,
A., Lüdecke, S., Winiecki, P., et al. (2004). Changes in brain
metabolism associated with remission in unipolar major depression. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 110, 184--194. Hood, K. E., Dreschel, N. A.,
& Granger, D. A. (2003). Maternal behavior changes after immune
challenge of neonates with developmental effects on adult social
behavior. Developmental Psychobiology, 42, 17--34. Hoppe, K. D. (1977).
Split-brains and psychoanalysis. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 46, 220--244.
Hoppe, K. D., & Bogen, J. E. (1977). Alexithymia in twelve
commissurotomized patients. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 28, 148--
155. Hoshaw, B. A., Malberg, J. E., & Lucki, I. (2005). Central
administration of IGF-I and BDNF leads to long-lasing
antidepressant-like effects. Brain Research, 1037, 204--208. Hoyle, R.
L., Bromberger, B., Groversman, H. D., Klauber, M. R., Dixon, S.D., &
Snyder, J. M. (1983). Regional anesthesia during newborn circumcision:
Effect on infant pain response. Clinical Pediatrics (Philadelphia), 22,
813--818. Hsu, F., Zhang, G., Raol, Y., Valentino, R., Coulter, D., &
BrooksKayal, A. (2003). Repeated neonatal handling with maternal
separation permanently alters hippocampal GABA receptors and behavioral
stress responses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA,
100, 12213--12218. Huang, Z. J., Kirkwood, A., Pizzarusso, T.,
Porciatti, V., Morales, B., Bear, M. F., et al. (1999). BDNF regulates
the maturation of inhibition and the critical period of plasticity in
mouse visual cortex. Cell, 98, 739--755. Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N.
(1962). Receptive field binocular interaction and functional
architecture in the cat's visual cortex. Journal of Physiology, 160,
106--154. Hurley, R. A., Taber, K. H., Zhang, J., & Hayman, L. A.
(1999). Neuropsychiatric presentation of multiple sclerosis. Journal of

Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 11, 5--7. Husain, M., &
Nachev, P. (2007). Space and the parietal cortex. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 11(1), 30--36. Huttenlocher, P. R. (1994). Synaptogenesis in
human cerebral cortex. In G. Dawson & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Human
behavior and the developing brain (pp. 137--152). New York: Guilford.
Iacoboni, M. (2008). Mirroring people. New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux. Iacoboni, M., Lieberman, M., Knowlton, I., Moritz, M., Throop,
C., & Fiske, A. (2004). Watching social interactions produces
dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases
compared to a resting baseline. NeuroImage, 21, 1167--1173. Ickes, B.
R., Pham, T. M., Sanders, L. A., Albeck, D.S., Mohammed, A. H., &
Grandholm, A. C. (2000). Long-term environmental enrichment leads to
regional increases in neurotrophin levels in rat brains. Experimental
Neurology, 164, 45--52. Ince, P. G. (2001). Pathological correlates of
late-onset dementia in a multicentre, community-based population in
England and Wales. The Lancet, 357, 169--175. Ingvar, D. H. (1985).
"Memory for the future": An essay on the temporal organization of
conscious awareness. Human Neurobiology, 4, 127--136. Introini-Collison,
I., & McGaugh, J. L. (1987). Naloxone and betaendorphin alter the
effects of post-training epinephrine on retention of an inhibitory
avoidance response. Psychopharmacology, 92, 229--235. Irle, E., Exner,
C., Thielen, K., Weniger, G., & Ruther, E. (1998). Obsessive-compulsive
disorder and ventromedial frontal lesions: Clinical and
neuropsychological findings. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155,
255--263. Ito, Y., Teicher, M. H., Glod, C. A., Harper, D., Magnus, E.,
& Gelbard, H.A. (1993). Increased prevalence of electrophysiological
abnormalities in children with psychological, physical, and sexual
abuse. Journal of Neuropsychiatry, 5, 401--408. Izard, C. E., Porges, S.
W., Simons, R. F., Haynes, O. M., Hyde, C., Parisi, M., et al. (1991).
Infant cardiac activity: Developmental changes and relations with
attachment. Developmental Psychology, 27, 432--439.

Jablonska, B., Gierdalski, M., Kossut, M., & Skangiel-Kramska, J.
(1999). Partial blocking of NMDA receptors reduces plastic changes
induced by shortlasting classical conditioning in the SL barrel cortex
of adult mice. Cerebral Cortex, 9, 222--231. Jackson, D. C., Mueller, C.
J., Dolski, I., Dalton, K. M., Nitschke, J. B., Urry, H. L., et
al. (2003). Now you feel it, now you don't: Frontal brain electrical
asymmetry and individual differences in emotion regulation.
Psychological Science, 14, 612--617. Jackson, P. L., & Decety, J.
(2004). Motor cognition: A new paradigm to study self-other
interactions. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 14, 259-- 263. Jacobs,
B., Driscoll, L., & Schall, M. (1997). Life-span dendritic and spine
changes in areas 10 and 18 of human cortex: A quantitative Golgi study.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 386, 661--680. Jacobs, B., Schall, M.,
& Scheibel, A. B. (1993). A quantitative dendritic analysis of
Wernicke's area in humans: II. Gender, hemispheric, and environmental
factors. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 327, 97-- 111. Jacobs, B., &
Scheibel, A. B. (1993). A quantitative dendritic analysis of Wernicke's
area in humans: I. Lifespan changes. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
327, 83--96. Jacobs, B. L., van Praag, H., & Gage, F. H. (2000).
Depression and the birth and death of brain cells. American Scientist,
88, 340--345. Jacobs, W. J., & Nadel, L. (1985). Stress-induced recovery
of fears and phobias. Psychological Review, 92, 512--531. Janoff-Bulman,
R. (1992). Shattered assumptions: Towards a new psychology of trauma.
New York: Free Press. Jason, G., & Pajurkova, E. (1992). Failure of
metacontrol: Breakdown in behavioral unity after lesions of the corpus
callosum and inferomedial frontal lobes. Cortex, 28, 241--260. Jaynes,
J. (1976). The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral
mind. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Jeannerod, M., Arbib, M. A., Rizzolatti,
G., & Sakata, H. (1995). Grasping objects: The cortical mechanism of
visuomotor transformation. Trends in Neurosciences, 18, 314--320.
Jellema, T., Baker, C. I., Wicker, B., & Perrett, D. I. (2000). Neural
representation for the perception of the intentionality of actions.
Brain and

Cognition, 44, 280--302. Jellema, T., Maassen, F., & Perrett, D. I.
(2004). Single cell integration of animate form, motion and location in
the superior temporal cortex of the macaque monkey. Cerebral Cortex, 14,
781--790. Ji, J., & Maren, S. (2007). Hippocampal involvement in
contextual modulation of fear extinction. Hippocampus, 17, 749--758.
Johanson, A., Gustafson, L., Passant, U., Risberg, J., Smith, G.,
Warkentin, S., et al. (1998). Brain function in spider phobia.
Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging Section, 84, 101--111. Johanson, A.,
Risberg, J., Tucker, D. M., & Gustafson, L. (2006). Changes in frontal
lobe activity with cognitive therapy for spider phobia. Applied
Neuropsychology, 13(1), 34--41. Johansson, B. B. (2000). Brain
plasticity and stroke rehabilitation: The Willis lecture. Stroke, 31,
223--230. Johnson, M. (1987). The body in the mind. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press. Johnstone, T., van Reekum, C. M., Urry, H. L., Kalin,
N. H., & Davidson, R. J. (2007). Failure to regulate: Counterproductive
recruitment of top-down prefrontal-subcortical circuitry in major
depression. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 8877--8884. Jonides, J.,
Schumacher, E. H., Smith, E. E., Koeppe, R. A., Awh, E., Reuter-Lorenz,
P. A., et al. (1998). The role of parietal cortex in verbal working
memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 5026--5034. Joseph, R. (1996).
Neuropsychiatry, neuropsychology, and clinical neuroscience. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins. Kalia, M. (2005). Neurobiological basis of
depression: An update. Metabolism, 54(5), 24--27. Kalin, N. H., Larson,
C., Shelton, S. E., & Davidson, R. J. (1998). Asymmetric frontal brain
activity, cortisol, and behavior associated with fearful temperament in
rhesus monkeys. Behavioral Neuroscience, 112, 286--292. Kalin, N. H.,
Shelton, S. E., Davidson, R. J., & Kelley, A. E. (2001). The primate
amygdala mediates acute fear but not the behavioral and physiological
components of anxious temperament. Journal of Neuroscience, 21,
2067--2074. Kalin, N. H., Shelton, S. E., & Lynn, D. E. (1995). Opiate
systems in mother and infant primates coordinate intimate contact during
reunion.

Psychoneuroendocrinology, 20, 735--742. Kalin, N. H., Shelton, S. E., &
Snowdon, C. T. (1993). Social factors regulating security and fear in
infant rhesus monkeys. Depression, 1, 137-- 142. Kalinichev, M.,
Easterlin, K., Plotsky, P., & Holtzman, S. (2002). Longlasting changes
in stress-induced corticosteron response and anxiety-like behaviors as a
consequence of neonatal maternal separation in Long-Evans rats.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 73, 131--141. Kalisch, R.,
Korenfeld, E., Stephan, K. E., Weiskopf, N., Seymour, B., & Dolan, R. J.
(2006). Context-dependent human extinction memory is mediated by a
ventromedial prefrontal and hippocampal network. Journal of
Neuroscience, 26, 9503--9511. Kampe, K. K. W., Frith, C. D., Dolan, R.
J., & Frith, U. (2001). Reward value of attractiveness and gaze. Nature,
413, 589--590. Kandel, E. R. (1998). A new intellectual framework for
psychiatry. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 457--469. Kang, H., &
Schuman, E. (1995). Long-lasting neurotrophin-induced enhancement of
synaptic transmission in the adult hippocampus. Science, 267,
1658--1662. Kaplan, H. S., & Robson, A. J. (2002). The emergence of
humans: The coevolution of intelligence and longevity with
intergenerational transfers. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 99, 10221--10226. Karmiloff-Smith, A., Klima, E.,
Bellugi, U., Grant, J., & Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Is there a social
module? Language, face processing, and theory of mind in individuals
with Williams syndrome. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 7, 196--208.
Karnath, H. O. (1997). Spatial orientation and the representation of
space with parietal lobe lesions. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society, Biological Sciences, 352, 1411--1419. Karni, A., Meyer,
G., Jezzard, P., Adams, M. M., Turner, R., & Ungerleider, L. G. (1995).
Functional MRI evidence for adult cortex plasticity during motor skill
learning. Nature, 377, 155--158. Karten, Y. J. G., Olariu, A., &
Cameron, H. A. (2005). Stress in early life inhibits neurogenesis in
adulthood. Trends in Neurosciences, 28(4), 171--172. Katz, L. C., &
Shatz, C. J. (1996). Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical
circuits. Science, 274, 1133--1138.

Katzman, R., Aronson, M., Fuld, P., Kawas, C., Brown, T., Morgenstern,
H., et al. (1989). Development of dementing illness in an 80year-old
volunteer cohort. Annals of Neurology, 25, 317--324. Keenan, J. P.,
McCutcheon, B., Freund, S., Gallup, G. G., Sanders, G., & Pascual-Leone,
A. (1999). Left hand advantage in a self-face recognition task.
Neuropsychologia, 37, 1421--1425. Kehoe, P., & Blass, E. M. (1989).
Conditioned opioid release in tenday-old rats: Reversal of stress with
maternal stimuli. Developmental Psychobiology, 19, 385--398. Kelly, A.,
Mullany, P. M., & Lynch, M. A. (2000). Protein synthesis in entorhinal
cortex and long-term potentiation in dentate gyrus. Hippocampus, 10,
431--437. Kempermann, G., Kuhn, H. G., & Gage, F. H. (1997). More
hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in an enriched environment.
Nature, 386, 493--495. Kempermann, G., Kuhn, H. G., & Gage, F. H.
(1998). Experienceinduced neurogenesis in the senescent dentate gyrus.
Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 3206--3212. Kennard, M. A. (1955). The
cingulate gyrus in relation to consciousness. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 121, 34--39. Kennedy, S. H., Evans, K. R., Kruger, S.,
Mayberg, H. S., Meyer, J. H., McCann, S., et al. (2001). Changes in
regional brain glucose metabolism measured with positron emission
tomography after paroxetine treatment of major depression. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 899--905. Kennedy, S. H., Konarski, J. Z.,
Segal, Z. V., Lau, M. A., Bieling, P. J., McIntyre, R. S., et
al. (2007). Differences in brain glucose metabolism between responders
to CBT and venlafaxine in a 16-week randomized controlled trial.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 778--788. Kern, S., Oakes, T.,
Stone, C., McAuliff, E., Kirschbaum, C., & Davidson, R. (2008). Glucose
metabolic changes in the prefrontal cortex are associated with HPA axis
response to psychosocial stressor. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 33,
517--529. Kerr, D. S., Huggett, A. M., & Abraham, W. C. (1994).
Modulation of hippocampal long-term potentiation and long-term
depression by corticosteroid receptor activation. Psychobiology, 22(2),
123--133. Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Koretz, D.,
Merikangas, K.R., et al. (2003). The epidemiology of major depressive

disorder: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication
(NCSR). Journal of the American Medical Association, 289, 3095--3105.
Keverne, E. B., Martens, N. D., & Tuite, B. (1989). Beta-endorphin
concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid of monkeys are influenced by
grooming relationships. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 18, 307--321. Kilgard,
M. P., & Merzenich, M. M. (1998). Cortical map reorganization enabled by
nucleus basalis activity. Science, 279, 1714-- 1718. Kim, H.,
Somerville, L. H., Johnstone, T., Alexander, A. L., & Whalen, P. J.
(2003). Inverse amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex responses to
surprised faces. NeuroReport, 14, 2317--2322. Kim, J. J., & Diamond, D.
M. (2002). The stressed hippocampus, synaptic plasticity and lost
memories. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 453--462. Kim, J. J., Koo, J.
W., Lee, H. J., & Han, J. S. (2005). Amygdalar inactivation blocks
stress-induced impairments in hippocampal long-term potentiation and
spatial memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 1532--1539. Kim, J. J.,
Lee, H. J., Han, J., & Packard, M. G. (2001). Amygdala is critical for
stress-induced modulation of hippocampal long-term potentiation and
learning. Journal of Neuroscience, 21, 5222--5228. Kimble, D. P. (1968).
Hippocampus and internal inhibition. Psychological Bulletin, 70,
285--295. King, V., & Elder, G. H., Jr. (1997). The legacy of
grandparenting: Childhood experiences with grandparents and current
involvement with grandchildren. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 59,
848--859. Kinsley, C. H., Trainer, R., Stafisso-Sandoz, G., Quadros, P.,
Keyser Marcus, L., Hearon, C., et al. (2006). Motherhood and the
hormones of pregnancy modify concentrations of hippocampal neuronal
dendritic spines. Hormones and Behaviour, 49, 131--142. Kirkpatrick, L.
A., & Davis, K. E. (1994). Attachment style, gender, and relationship
stability: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 66(3), 502--512. Kirkwood, A., Rozas, C., Kirkwood, J.,
Perez, F., & Bear, M. F. (1999). Modulation of long-term synaptic
depression in visual cortex by acetylcholine and norepinephrine. Journal
of Neuroscience, 19, 1599--1609. Kirschbaum, C., Wolf, O. T., May, M.,
Wippich, W., & Hellhammer, D. H. (1996). Stress-and treatment-induced
elevations of cortisol levels

associated with impaired declarative memory in healthy adults. Life
Sciences, 58(17), 1475--1483. Klein, E., Kreinin, I., Chistyakov, A.,
Koren, D., Mecz, L., Marmur, S., et al. (1999). Therapeutic efficacy of
right prefrontal slow repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in
major depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 315--320. Kling,
A., & Steklis, H. D. (1976). A neural substrate for affiliative behavior
in nonhuman primates. Brain Behaviors, 13, 216--238. Klingberg, T.,
Forssberg, H., & Westerberg, H. (2002). Increased brain activity in
frontal and parietal cortex underlies the development of visuospatial
working memory capacity during childhood. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 14(1), 1--10. Knight, R. T., & Grabowecky, M. (1995).
Escape from linear time: Prefrontal cortex and conscious experience. In
M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The cognitive neurosciences (pp. 1357--1372).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Knight, R. T., Staines, R. W., Swick, D., &
Chao, L. L. (1999). Prefrontal cortex inhibition and excitation in
distributed neural networks. Acta Psychologica, 101(2--3), 159--178.
Knowles, P. A., Conner, R. L., & Panksepp, J. (1989). Opiate effects on
social behavior of juvenile dogs as a function of social deprivation.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 33, 533--537. Knutson, K. M.,
Mah, L., Manly, C. F., & Grafman, J. (2007). Neural correlates of
automatic beliefs about gender and race. Human Brain Mapping, 28,
915--930. Koechlin, E., Ody, C., & Kouneiher, F. (2003). The
architecture of cognitive control in the human prefrontal cortex.
Science, 302, 1181--1185. Kohut, H. (1984). How does analysis cure?
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Kolb, B., & Gibb, R. (1991).
Environmental enrichment and cortical injury: Behavioral and anatomical
consequences of frontal cortex lesions. Cerebral Cortex, 1, 189--198.
Kolb, B., & Gibb, R. (2002). Frontal lobe plasticity and behavior. In T.
Donald & T. Robert (Eds.), Principles of frontal lobe function
(pp. 541-- 556). New York: Oxford University Press. Kolb, B., & Whishaw,
I. Q. (1998). Brain plasticity and behavior. Annual Review of
Psychology, 49, 43--64.

Kong, J., Gollub, R. L., Rosman, I. S., Webb, J. M., Vangel, M. J.,
Kirsch, I., et al. (2006). Brain activity associated with
expectancy-enhanced placebo analgesia as measured by functional magnetic
resonance imaging. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 381--388. Konig, P., &
Engel, A. K. (1995). Correlated firing in sensory-motor systems. Current
Opinions in Neurobiology, 5, 511--519. Koopman, C., Classen, C., &
Spiegel, D. (1994). Predictors of posttraumatic stress symptoms among
survivors of the Oakland/Berkeley, Calif. firestorm. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 151, 888--894. Kosten, T., Lee, H., & Kim, J. (2007).
Neonatal handling alters learning in adult male and female rats in a
task-specific manner. Brain Research, 1154, 144--153. Koukkou, M., &
Lehmann, D. (2006). Experience-dependent brain plasticity: A key concept
for studying nonconscious decisions. International Congress Series,
1286, 45--52. Kringelbach, M. L. (2005). The human orbitofrontal cortex:
Linking reward to hedonic experience. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6,
691--702. Kroger, J. K., Sabb, F. W., Fales, C. L., Bookeimer, S. Y.,
Cohen, M. S., & Holyoak, K. J. (2002). Recruitment of anterior
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in human reasoning: A parametric study of
relational complexity. Cerebral Cortex, 12, 477--485. Krueger, F., Moll,
J., Zahn, R., Heinecke, A., & Grafman, J. (2006). Event frequency
modulates the processing of daily life activities in human medial
prefrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhl143
OceanofPDF.com

Krugers, H. J., Goltstein, P. M., van der Linden, S., & Joels, M.
(2006). Blockade of glucocorticoid receptors rapidly restores
hippocampal CA1 synaptic plasticity after exposure to chronic stress.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 3051--3055. Krystal, J. H.,
Bremner, J. D., Southwick, S. M., & Charney, D. S. (1998). The emerging
neurobiology of dissociation: Implication for treatment of
post-traumatic stress disorder. In J. D. Bremner & C. R. Marmar (Eds.),
Trauma, memory, and dissociation (pp. 321--364). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press. Kuhlmann, S., Piel, M., & Wolf, O. T.
(2005). Imparied memory retrieval after psychosocial stress in healthy
young men. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 2977--2982. Kuhn, C. M., &
Schanberg, S. M. (1998). Responses to maternal separation: Mechanisms
and mediators. International Journal of Developmental Neuroscience, 16,
261--270. Kukolja, J., Schlapfer, T., Keysers, C., Klingmuller, D.,
Maier, W., Fink, G., et al. (2008). Modeling a negative response bias in
the human amygdala by noradregenic-glucocorticoid interactions. Progress
in Brain Research, 167, 35--51. Laatsch, L., Pavel, D., Jobe, T., Lin,
Q., & Quintana, J. C. (1999). Incorporation of SPECT imaging in a
longitudinal cognitive rehabilitation therapy programme. Brain Injury,
13, 555--570. LaBar, K. S., Gatenby, J. C., Gore, J. C., LeDoux, J. E.,
& Phelps, A. E. (1998). Human amygdala activation during conditioned
fear acquisition and extinction: A mixed-trial FMRI study. Neuron, 20,
937--945. LaBar, K. S., LeDoux, J. E., Spencer, D. D., & Phelps, E. A.
(1995). Impaired fear conditioning following unilateral temporal
lobectomy in humans. Journal of Neuroscience, 15, 6846--6855. Lachmann,
F. M., & Beebe B. A. (1996). Three principles of salience in the
organization of the patient-analyst interaction. Psychoanalytic
Psychology, 13, 1--22. Ladd, C., Thrivikraman, K., Hout, R., & Plotsky,
P. (2005). Differential neuroendocrine responses to chronic variable
stress in adult Long Evans rats exposed to handling-maternal separation
as neonates. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 30, 520--533. Lahdenperä, M.,
Lummaa, V., Helle, S., Tremblay, M., & Russell, A. F. (2004). Fitness
benefits of prolonged post-reproductive lifespan in women.

Nature, 428, 178--181. Langer, E. J. (1978). Rethinking the role of
thought in social interaction. InJ. H. Harvey, W. Ickes, & R.F. Kidd
(Eds.), New directions in attribution research (Vol. 2, pp. 35--58).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Lanius, R. A., Williamson, P. C., Bluhm, R. L.,
Densmore, M., Boksman, K., Neufeld, R. W. J., et al. (2005). Functional
connectivity of dissociative responses in posttraumatic stress disorder:
A functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation. Biological
Psychiatry, 57, 873-- 884. Lanius, R. A., Williamson, P. C., Densmore,
M., Boksman, K., Gupta, M.A., Neufeld, R. W., et al. (2001). Neural
correlation of traumatic memories in posttraumatic stress disorder: A
functional MRI investigation. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158,
1920--1922. Larson, C., Schaefer, H., Siegle, G., Jackson, C., Anderle,
M., & Davidson, R. (2006). Fear is fast in phobic individuals: Amygdala
activation in response to fear-relevant stimuli. Biological Psychiatry,
60, 410--417. Lawson, D. M., Barnes, A. D., Madkins, J. P., &
Francios-Lamonte, B. M. (2006). Changes in male partner abuser
attachment styles in group treatment. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research,
Practice, Training, 43(2), 232--237. Lázaro, L., Bargalló, N.,
Castro-Fornieles, J., Falcón, C., Andrés, S., Calvo, R., et al. (2009).
Brain changes in children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive
disorder before and after treatment: A voxel-based morphometric MRI
study. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 172(2), 140--146. Le Carret,
N., Lafont, S., Letenneur, L., Dartigues, J. F., Mayo, W., & Fabrigoule,
C. (2003). The effect of education on cognitive performances and its
implication for the constitution of the cognitive reserve. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 23, 317--337. LeDoux, J. E. (1986). Sensory systems and
emotion: A model of affective processing. Integrative Psychiatry, 4,
237--243. LeDoux, J. E. (1994). Emotion, memory and the brain.
Scientific American, 270(6), 32--39. LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional
brain. New York: Simon and Schuster.

LeDoux, J. E., Romanski, L. M., & Xagoraris, A. E. (1989). Indelibility
of subcortical emotional memories. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 1,
238--243. LeDoux, J. E., Wilson, D. H., & Gazzaniga, M. S. (1977). A
divided mind: Observations on the conscious properties of the separated
hemispheres. Annals of Neurology, 2, 417--421. Lee, R. D. (2003).
Rethinking the evolutionary theory of aging: Transfers, not births,
shape senescence in social species. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA, 100, 9637--9642. Lee, T. M. C., Liu, H. L., Chan, C.
C. H., Fang, S. Y., & Gao, J. H. (2005). Neural activities associated
with emotion recognition observed in men and women. Molecular
Psychiatry, 10, 450--455. Lee, Y., & Davis, M. (1997). Role of the
hippocampus, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and the amygdala in
the excitatory effect of corticotropin-releasing hormone on the acoustic
startle reflex. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 6434--6446. Lemer, C.,
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., & Cohen, L. (2003). Approximate quantities and
exact number words: Dissociable systems. Neuropsychologica, 41,
1942--1958. Leonard, C. M., Rolls, E. T., Wilson, F. A. W., & Baylis, G.
C. (1985). Neurons in the amygdala of the monkey with responses
selective for faces. Behavioral Brain Research, 15, 159--176.
Leventopoulos, M., Rüedi-Bettschen, D., Knuesel, I., Feldon, J., Pryce,
C.R., & Opacka-Juffry, J. (2007). Long-term effects of early life
deprivation on brain glia in Fischer rats. Brain Research, 1142,
119--126. Lévesque, J., Eugène, F., Joanette, Y., Mensour, B., Beaudoin,
G., Leroux, J.M., et al. (2003). Neural correlates of sad feelings in
healthy girls. Neuroscience, 121, 545--551. Lévesque, J., Eugène, F.,
Joanette, Y., Paquette, V., Mensour, B., Beaudoin, G., et al. (2003).
Neural circuitry underlying voluntary suppression of sadness. Biological
Psychiatry, 53, 502--510. Lévesque, J., Joanette, Y., Mensour, B.,
Beaudoin, G., Leroux, J. M., Bourgouin, P., et al. (2004). Neural basis
of emotional self-regulation in childhood. Neuroscience, 129, 361--369.
Levin, P., Lazrove, S., & van der Kolk, B. (1999). What psychological
testing and neuroimaging tell us about the treatment of posttraumatic
stress

disorder by eye movement desensitization and reprocessing. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 13, 159--172. Levy, D. A. (1997). Tools of critical
thinking. Boston: Allyn & Bacon. Levy, J., Trevarthen, C., & Sperry, R.
W. (1972). Perception of bilateral chimeric figures following
hemispheric disconnection. Brain, 95, 61--78. Lewicki, P., Hill, T., &
Czyzewska, M. (1992). Nonconscious acquisition of information. American
Psychologist, 47, 796--801. Lewis, M., Feiring, C., & Rosenthal, S.
(2000). Attachment over time. Child Development, 71, 707--720. Li, H.,
Weiss, S. R. B., Chaung, D. M., Post, R. M., & Rogawski, M. A. (1998).
Bidirectional synaptic plasticity in the rat basolateral amygdala:
Characterization of an activity-dependent switch sensitive to the
presynaptic metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist
2S-alphaethyglutamic acid. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 1662--1670. Li,
X., Jiang, J., Zhu, W., Yu., C., Sui, M., Wang, Y., et al. (2007).
Asymmetry of prefrontal cortical convolution complexity in males with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder using fractal information
dimension. Brain and Development, 29, 649--655. Lieberman, M. D.,
Eisenberger, N. I., Crockett, M. J., Tom, S. M., Pfeifer, J.H., & Way,
B. M. (2007). Putting feelings into words: Affect labeling disrupts
amygdala activity in response to affective stimuli. Psychological
Science, 18, 421--428. Linden, D. E. J. (2006). How psychotherapy
changes the brain---the contribution of functional neuroimaging.
Molecular Psychiatry, 11, 528-- 538. Linehan, M. (1993).
Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New
York: Guilford. Liu, D., Diorio, J., Day, J. C., Francis, D. D., &
Meaney, M. J. (2000). Maternal care, hippocampal synaptogenesis and
cognitive development in rats. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 799--806. Liu,
D., Diorio, J., Tannenbaum, B., Caldji, C., Francis, D., Freedman, A.,
et al. (1997). Maternal care, hippocampal glucocorticoid receptors, and
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responses to stress. Science, 277, 1659--
1662. Liu, L., Wong, T. P., Pozza, M. F., Lingenhoehl, K., Wang, Y.,
Sheng, M., et al. (2004). Role of NMDA receptor subtypes in governing
the direction of hippocampal synaptic plasticity. Science, 304,
1021--1024.

Livingston, R. B. (1967). Reinforcement. In G. C. Quarton, T. Melnick,
&F. O. Schmitt (Eds.), The neurosciences (pp. 568--576). New York:
Rockefeller University Press Loftus, E. (1988). Memory. New York:
Ardsley House. Loftus, E. F., Milo, E. M., & Paddock, J. R. (1995). The
accidental executioner: Why psychotherapy must be informed by science.
Counseling Psychologist, 23, 300--309. Lombroso, P. J., & Sapolsky, R.
(1998). Development of the cerebral cortex: Stress and brain
development. Journal of the Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
37, 1337--1339. Lonstein, J. S., Simmons, D. A., Swann, J. M., & Stern,
J. M. (1998). Forebrain expression of c-fos due to active maternal
behaviour in lactating rats. Neuroscience, 82, 267--281. Lorberbaum, J.
P., Newman, J. D., Dubno, J. R., Horwitz, A. R., Nahas, Z., Teneback, C.
C., et al. (1999). Feasability of using fMRI to study mothers responding
to infant cries. Depression and Anxiety, 10, 99--104. Lord, C. G., Ross,
L., & Lepper, M. (1979). Biased assimilation and attitude polarization:
The effects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1231--1247. Lorenz, K.
(1991). Here am I---where are you: The behavior of the Greylag Goose.
New York: Brace Jovanovich. Lou, H., Nowak, M., & Kajaer, T. W. (2005).
The mental self. Progress in Brain Resources, 150, 197--204. Lou, H. C.,
Henriksen, L., & Bruhn, P. (1984). Focal cerebral hypoperfusion in
children with dysphasia and/or attention deficit disorder. Archives of
Neurology, 41, 825--829. Lou, H. C., Luber, B., Crupain, M., Keenan, J.
P., Nowak, M., Kjaer, T. W., et al. (2004). Parietal cortex and
representation of the mental self. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA, 101, 6827--6832. Lovell, J., & Kluger, J. (1994). Lost
moon: The perilous voyage of Apollo 13. New York: Simon & Schuster. Lu,
S. T., Hamalainen, M. S., Hari, R., Ilmoniemi, R. J., Lounasmaa, O. V.,
Sams, M., et al. (1991). Seeing faces activates three separate areas
outside the occipital visual cortex in man. Neuroscience, 43, 287--290.
Luna, B. (2004). Algebra and the adolescent brain. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8, 437--439.

Lupien, S., de Leon, M., de Santi, S., Convit, A., Tarshish, C., Nair,
N., et al. (1998). Cortisol levels during human aging predict
hippocampal atrophy and memory deficits. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 69--73.
Lupien, S. J., & McEwen, B. S. (1997). The acute effects of
corticosteroids on cognition: Integration of animal and human model
studies. Brain Research Reviews, 24(1), 1--27. Maccari, S., Piazza, P.
V., Kabbaj, M., Barbazanges, A., Simon, H., & Le Moal, M. (1995).
Adoption reverses the long-term impairment in glucocorticoid feedback
induced by prenatal stress. Journal of Neuroscience, 15(1), 110--116.
Mackie, S., Shaw, P., Lenroot, R., Pierson, R., Greenstein, D. K.,
Nugent, T.F., et al. (2007). Cerebellar development and clinical outcome
in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 164, 647--655. MacLean, P. D. (1985). Brain evolution
relating to family, play, and the separation call. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 42, 405--417. MacLean, P. D. (1990). The triune brain in
evolution: Role of paleocerebral functions. New York: Plenum Press.
Macrae, C. N., Moran, J. M., Heatherton, T. F., Banfield, J. F., &
Kelley, W.M. (2004). Medial prefrontal activity predicts memory for
self. Cerebral Cortex, 14, 647--654. Maguire, E. A., Woollett, K., &
Spiers, H. J. (2006). London taxi drivers and bus drivers: A structural
MRI and neuropsychological analysis. Hippocampus, 16, 1091--1101. Maher,
B. A. (1974). Delusional thinking and perceptual disorder. Journal of
Individual Psychology, 30, 98--113. Maier, S. F., Amat, J., Baratta, M.
V., Paul, E., & Watkins, L. R. (2006). Behavioral control, the medial
prefrontal cortex, and resilience. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience,
8, 397--406. Main, M., (1993). Discourse, prediction, and the recent
studies in attachment: Implications for psychoanalysis. Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association, 41, 209--244. Main, M., & Goldwyn,
R. (1998). Adult attachment scoring and classification system.
Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Berkeley. Main, M.,
Kaplan, N., & Cassidy, J. (1985). Security in infancy, childhood, and
adulthood: A move to the level of representation. In I.

Bretherton & E. Waters (Eds.), Growing points of attachment theory and
research. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
50(1--2, Serial No. 209, pp. 66--104). Malenka, R. C., & Siegelbaum, S.
A. (2001). Synaptic plasticity: Diverse targets and mechanisms for
regulating synaptic efficacy. In W. M. Cowan, T. C. Sudhof, & C. F.
Stevens (Eds.), Synapses (pp. 393--453). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press. Maletic-Savatic, M., Malinow, R., & Svoboda, K.
(1999). Rapid dendritic morphogenesis in CA1 hippocampal dendrites
induced by synaptic activity. Science, 283, 1923--1927. Malloy, P.,
Bihrle, A., Duffy, J., & Cimino, C. (1993). The orbitomedial frontal
syndrome. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 8, 185--201. Marais, L.,
van Rensburg, S. J., van Zyl, J. M., Stein, D. J., & Daniels, W.M. U.
(2008). Maternal separation of rat pups increases the risk of developing
depressive-like behavior after subsequent chronic stress by altering
corticosterone and neurotrophin levels in the hippocampus. Neuroscience
Research, 61(1), 106--112. Marci, C. D., Ham, J., Moran, E., & Orr, S.
P. (2007). Physiologic correlates of perceived therapist empathy and
social-emotional process during psychotherapy. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 195(2), 103--111. Markis, N., Biederman, J., Vatera, E.,
Bush, G., Kaiser, J., Kennedy, D. N., et al. (2007). Cortical thinning
of the attention and executive function networks in adults with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Cerebral Cortex, 17,
1364--1375. Marr, D. (1971). A theory of archicortex. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society, 262, 23--81. Marshall, R. E.,
Stratton, W. C., Moore, J., & Boxerman, S. B. (1980). Circumcision I:
Effects upon newborn behavior. Infant Behavioral Development, 3, 1--14.
Marshuetz, C., Smith, E., Jonides, J., DeGutis, J., & Chenevert, T.
(2000). Order information in working memory: fMRI evidence for parietal
and prefrontal mechanisms. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12(2),
130-- 144. Martin, A., Wiggs, C., Ungerleider, L., & Haxby, J. (1996).
Neural correlates of category-specific knowledge. Nature, 379, 649--652.

Martin, S. D., Martin, E., Rai, S. S., Richardson, M. A., & Royall, R.
(2001). Brain blood flow changes in depressed patients treated with
interpersonal psychotherapy or venlafaxine hydrochloride. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 58, 641--648. Massey, P. V., Johnson, B. E., Moult,
P. R., Auberson, Y. P., Brown, M. W., Molnar, E., et al. (2004).
Differential roles of NR2A and NR2Bcontaining NMDA receptors in cortical
long-term potentiation and longterm depression. Journal of Neuroscience,
24, 7821--7828. Mateer, C. A., & Kerns, K. A. (2000). Capitalizing on
neuroplasticity. Brain and Cognition, 42, 106--109. Mathew, R. J.,
Meyer, J. S., Francis, D. J., Semchuk, K. M., & Claghorn, J.L. (1980).
Cerebral blood flow in depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 137,
1449--1450. Matsumoto, K., & Tanaka, K. (2004). The role of the medial
prefrontal cortex in achieving goals. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
14, 178--185. Mayberg, H. S. (1997). Limbic-cortical dysregulation: A
proposed model of depression. Journal of Neuropsychiatry, 9, 471--481.
Mayberg, H. S., Liotti, M., Brannan, S. K., McGinnis, S., Mahurin, R.
K., Jerabek, P. A., et al. (1999). Reciprocal limbic-cortical function
and negative mood: Converging PET findings in depression and normal
sadness. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 675--682. Mayberg, H. S.,
Silva, J. A., Brannan, S. K., Tekell, J. L., Mahurin, R. K., McGinnis,
S., et al. (2002). The functional neuroanatomy of the placebo effect.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 728--737. McCarthy, G. (1995).
Functional neuroimaging of memory. The Neuroscientist, 1, 155--163.
McCormick, J. A., Lyons, V., Jacobson, M. D., Noble, J., Diorio, J.,
Nyirenda, M., et al. (2000). 5'-Heterogeneity of glucocorticoid receptor
messenger RNA is tissue specific: Differential regulation of variant
transcripts by early-life events. Molecular Endocrinology, 14, 506--517.
McDonald, A. J., Shammah-Lagnado, S. J., Shi, C., & Davis, M. (1999).
Cortical afferents to the extended amygdala. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 877, 309--338. McFarlane, A. C., & Yehuda, R.
(1996). Resilience, vulnerability, and the course of posttraumatic
reactions. In B. A. van der Kolk, A. C. McFarlane, &L. Weisaeth (Eds.),
Traumatic stress: The effects of

overwhelming experience on mind, body, and society (pp. 129--154). New
York: Guilford. McGaugh, J. L. (1990). Significance and remembrance: The
role of neuromodulatory systems. Psychological Science, 1, 15--25.
McGaugh, J. L. (2004). The amygdala modulates the consolidation of
memories of emotionally arousing experiences. Annual Reviewof
Neuroscience, 17, 1--28. McGaugh, J. L., Introini-Collison, I. B.,
Cahill, L. F., Castellano, C., Dalmaz, C., Parent, M. B., et al. (1993).
Neuromodulatory systems and memory storage: Role of the amygdala.
Behavioral Brain Research, 58, 81-- 90. McGowan, P. O., Sasaki, A.,
D'Alessio, A. C., Dymov, S., Labonte, B., Szyf, M., et al. (2009).
Epigenetic regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human brain
associates with childhood abuse. Nature Neuroscience, 12(3), 342--348.
McGuire, P. K., Paulesu, E., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Frith, C. D.
(1996). Brain activity during stimulus independent thought. NeuroReport,
7(13), 2095--2099. Meaney, M. J., Aitken, D. H., van Berkel, C.,
Bhatnagar, S., & Sapolsky, R.M. (1988). Effect of neonatal handling on
age-related impairments associated with the hippocampus. Science, 239,
766--768. Meaney, M. J., Aitken, D. H., Viau, V., Sharma, S., &
Sarrieau, A. (1989). Neonatal handling alters adrenocortical negative
feedback sensitivity and hippocampal type II glucocorticoid receptor
binding in the rat. Neuroendocrinology, 50, 597--604. Meaney, M. J.,
Mitchell, J. B., Aitken, D. H., Bhatnagar, S., Bodnoff, S. R., Iny, L.
J., et al. (1991). The effects of neonatal handling on the development
of the adrenocortical response to stress: Implications for
neuropathology and cognitive deficits in later life.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 16(1--3), 85--103. Meaney, M. J., & Szyf, M.
(2005). Maternal care as a model for experience-dependent chromatin
plasticity? Trends in Neurosciences, 28, 456--463. Medendorp, W. P.,
Goltz, H. C., Crawford, D., & Vilis, T. (2005). Integration of target
and effector information in human posterior parietal cortex for the
planning of action. Journal of Neurophysiology, 93, 945--962.

Menard, J. L., Champagne, D. L., & Meaney, M. J. P. (2004). Variations
of maternal care differentially influence "fear" reactivity and regional
patterns of cFos immunoreactivity in response to the shock-probe burying
test. Neuroscience, 129(2), 297--308. Menkes, D. L., Bodnar, P.,
Ballesteros, R. A., & Swenson, M. R. (1999). Right frontal lobe slow
frequency transcranial magnetic stimulation (SF-r-TMS) is an effective
treatment for depression: A case-control pilot study of safety and
efficacy. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 67,
113--115. Merrin, E. L., & Silberfarb, P. M. (1979). The Capgras
phenomenon. Archives of General Psychiatry, 33, 965--968. Mesulam, M. M.
(1981). A cortical network for directed attention and unilateral
neglect. Annals of Neurology, 10, 309--325. Mesulam, M. M. (1998). From
sensation to cognition. Brain, 121, 1013--1052. Meyers, C. A., Berman,
S. A., Scheibel, R. S., & Hayman, A. (1992). Case report: Acquired
antisocial personality disorder associated with unilateral left orbital
frontal lobe damage. Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 17,
121--125. Michael, N., & Erfurth, A. (2002). Treatment of bipolar mania
with right prefrontal rapid transcranial magnetic stimulation. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 78, 253--257. Michel, G. F., & Moore, C. L.
(1995). Developmental psychobiology: An interdisciplinary science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Milad, M. R., Orr, S. P., Pitman, R. K., &
Rauch, S. L. (2005). Context modulation of memory for fear extinction in
humans. Pyschophysiology, 42, 456--464. Milad, M. R., Quinn, B. T.,
Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., Fischl, B., & Rauch, S. L. (2005). Thickness
of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in humans is correlated with
extinction in memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 102, 10706--10711. Milad, M. R., & Quirk, G. J. (2002). Neurons in
medial prefrontal cortex signal memory for fear extinction. Nature, 420,
70--74. Milad, M. R., Vidal-Gonzalez, I., & Quirk, G. J. (2004).
Electrical stimulation of medial prefrontal cortex reduces conditioned
fear in a temporally specific manner. Behavioral Neuroscience, 118(2),
389--394.

Miller, A. (1981). Prisoners of childhood: The drama of the gifted child
and the search for the true self. New York: Basic Books. Miller, A.
(1983). For your own good: Hidden cruelty in child-rearing and the roots
of violence. New York: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux. Miller, H., Alvarez,
V., & Miller (1990). The psychopathology and psychoanalytic
psychotherapy of compulsive caretaking. Unpublished manuscript.
Minagawa-Kawai, Y., Matsuoka, S., Dan, I., Naoi, N., Nakamura, K., &
Kojima, S. (2008). Prefrontal activation associated with social
attachment: Facial emotion recognition in mothers and infants. Cerebral
Cortex, 19(2), 284--292. Mirescu, C., Peters, J. D., & Gould, E. (2004).
Early life experience alters response of adult neurogenesis to stress.
Nature Neuroscience, 7, 841--846. Mitchell, J. P., Banaji, M. R., &
Macrae, C. N. (2005). The link between social cognition and
self-referential thought in the medial prefrontal cortex. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 1306--1315. Mitchell, J. P., Macrae, C. N.,
& Banaji, M. R. (2006). Dissociable medial prefrontal contributions to
judgments of similar and dissimilar others. Neuron, 50, 655--663. Mitra,
R., & Sapolsky, R. M. (2008). Acute corticosterone treatment is
sufficient to induce anxiety and amygdaloid dendritic hypertrophy.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 105, 5573--5578.
Modney, B. K., & Hatton, G. I. (1994). Maternal behaviors: Evidence that
they feed back to alter brain morphology and function. Acta Paediatrica
Supplement, 397, 29--32. Modney, B., Yang, Q., & Hatton, G. (1990).
Activation of excitatory amino acid inputs to supraoptic neurons. II.
Increased dye-coupling in maternally behaving virgin rats. Brain
Research, 513, 270--273. Moerman, D. E., & Jonas, W. B. (2002).
Deconstructing the placebo effect and finding the meaning response.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 136, 471--476. Molko, N., Cachia, A.,
Riviere, D., Mangin, J. F., Brauandet, M., Bihan, D.L., et al. (2003).
Functional and structural alteration of the intrapietal sulcus in a
developmental dyscalculia of genetic origin. Neuron, 40, 847-- 858.

Monfils, M., Cowansage, K. K., & LeDoux, J. E. (2007). Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor: Linking fear learning to memory consolidation.
Molecular Pharmacology, 72, 235--237. Morgan, C. A., Wang, S.,
Southwick, S. M., Rasmusson, A., Hazlett, G., Hauger, R. L., et
al. (2000). Plasma neuropeptide-Y concentrations in humans exposed to
military survival training. Biological Psychiatry, 47, 902--909. Morgan,
M. A., Romanski, L. M., & Le Doux, J. E. (1993). Extinction of emotional
learning: Contribution of medial prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience
Letters, 163, 109--113. Moriceau, S., & Sullivan, R. M. (2004).
Corticosterone influences on mammalian neonatal sensitive-period
learning. Behavioral Neuroscience, 118(2), 274--281. Morley-Fletcher,
S., Rea, M., Maccari, S., & Laviola, G. (2003). Environmental enrichment
during adolescence reverses the effects of prenatal stress on play
behaviour and HPA axis reactivity in rats. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 18, 3367--3374. Morrison, J. H., & Hof, P. R. (2003).
Changes in cortical circuits during aging. Clinical Neuroscience
Research, 2, 294--304. Mountcastle, V. B. (1995). The parietal system
and some higher brain functions. Cerebral Cortex, 5, 377--390. Myers, J.
J., & Sperry, R. W. (1985). Interhemispheric communication after section
of the forebrain commissures. Cortex, 21, 249--260. Myers, K. M., &
Davis, M. (2007). Mechanisms of fear extinction. Molecular Psychiatry,
12, 120--150. Myers, W. A., Churchill, J. D., Muja, N., & Garraghty, P.
E. (2000). Role of NMDA receptors in adult primates cortical
somatosensory plasticity. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 418,
373--382. Nachmias, M., Gunnar, M. R., Mangelsdorf, S., Parritz, R. H.,
& Buss, K. (1996). Behavioral inhibition and stress reactivity: The
moderating role of attachment security. Child Development, 67, 508--522.
Nagahama, Y., Okada, T., Katsumi, Y., Hayashi, T., Yamauchi, H.,
Oyanagi, C., et al. (2001). Dissociable mechanisms of attentional
control within the human prefrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 11, 85--92.
Nakatani, E., Nakgawa, A., Ohara, Y., Goto, S., Uozumi, N., Iwakiri, M.,
et al. (2003). Effects of behavior therapy on regional cerebral blood

flow in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Resources, 124(2),
113-- 120. Nasrallah, H. A. (1985). The unintegrated right cerebral
hemispheric consciousness as alien intruder: A possible mechanism for
Schneiderian delusions in schizophrenia. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 20,
273--282. Nauta, W. J. H. (1971). The problem of the frontal lobe: A
reinterpretation. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 8, 167--187. Navalta,
C. P., Polcari, A., Webster, D. M., Boghossian, A., & Teicher, M.H.
(2004). Effects of childhood sexual abuse on neuropsychological
cognitive function in college women. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and
Clinical Neuroscience, 18(1), 45--53. Nebes, R. D. (1971). Superiority
of the minor hemisphere in commissurotomized man for the perception of
part-whole relationships. Cortex, 7, 333--349. Nedergaard, M., Ransom,
B., & Goldman, S. A. (2003). New roles for astrocytes: Redefining the
functional architecture of the brain. Trends in Neurosciences, 26,
523--530. Nelson, C. A., & Carver, L. J. (1998). The effects of stress
and trauma on brain and memory: A view from developmental cognitive
neuroscience. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 793--809. Nelson, E.
E., & Panksepp, J. (1998). Brain substrates of infant-mother attachment:
Contributions of opioids, oxytocin, and norepinephrine. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 22, 437--452. Nelson, K. (1993). The
psychological and social origins of autobiographical memory.
Psychological Science, 4, 7--14. Nelson, M. D., Saykin, A. J., Flashman,
L. A., & Riordan, H. J. (1998). Hippocampal volume reduction in
schizophrenia as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging: A meta-analytic
study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 433--440. Nemeroff, C., Heim,
C. M., Thase, M. E., Klein, D. N., Rush, A., & Schatzberg, A. (2003).
Differential responses to psychotherapy versus pharmacotherapy in
patients with chronic forms of major depression and childhood trauma.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 25, 14293--14296.
Nesse, R. M., & Lloyd, A. T. (1992). The evolution of psychodynamic
mechanisms. In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted

mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 601--
626). New York: Oxford University Press. Neugebauer, V., Li, W., Bird,
G., & Han, J. (2004). The amygdala and persistent pain. The
Neuroscientist, 10(3), 221--234. Neumann, I. D. (2008). Brain oxytocin:
A key regulator of emotional and social behaviors in both females and
males. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 20, 858--865. Newberg, A., Alavi,
A., Baime, M., Pourdehnad, M., Santanna, J., & Aquili, E. (2001). The
measurement of cerebral blood flow during the complex cognitive task of
meditation: A preliminary SPECT study. Psychiatric Research:
Neuroimaging Section, 106, 113--122. Newcomer, J. W., Craft, S.,
Hershey, T., Askins, K., & Bardgett, M. E. (1994).
Glucocorticoid-induced impairment in declarative memory performance in
adult humans. Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 2047--2053. Newcomer, J. W.,
Selke, G., Melson, A. K., Hershey, T., Craft, S., Richards, K., et
al. (1999). Decreased memory performance in healthy humans induced by
stress-level cortisol treatment. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56,
527--533. Newman, D. (1982). Perspective-taking versus context in
understanding lies. Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory of
Comparative Human Cognition, 4, 26--29. Newman, S. D., Carpenter, P. A.,
Varma, S., & Just, M. A. (2003). Frontal and parietal participation in
problem solving in the Tower of London: fMRI and computational modeling
of planning and high-level perception. Neuropsychologia, 41, 1668--1682.
Nichols, K., & Champness, B. (1971). Eye gaze and the GRS. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 7, 623--626. Nielson, K. A., Yee, D., &
Erickson, K. I. (2005). Memory enhancement by a semantically unrelated
emotional arousal source induced after learning. Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory, 84, 49--56. Nikolaenko, N. N., Egorov, A. Y., &
Freiman, E. A. (1997). Representational activity of the right and left
hemispheres of the brain. Behavioral Neurology, 10, 49--59. Nilsson, L.,
Mohammed, A. K. H., Henriksson, B. G., Folkesson, R., Winblad, B., &
Bergstrom, L. (1993). Environmental influence on somatostatin levels and
gene expression in the rat brain. Brain Research, 628, 93--98.

Nimchinsky, E. A., Gilissen, E., Allman, J. M., Perl, D. P., Erwin, J.
M., & Hof, P. R. (1999). A neuronal morphologic type unique to humans
and great apes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA,
96, 5268--5273. Nimchinsky, E. A., Vogt, B. A., Morrison, J. H., & Hof,
P. R. (1995). Spindle neurons of the human anterior cingulate cortex.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 355, 27--37. Nisenbaum, L. K.,
Zigmond, M. J., Sved, A. F., & Abercrombie, E. D. (1991). Prior exposure
to chronic stress results in enhanced synthesis and release of
hippocampal norepinephrine in response to novel stressors. Journal of
Neuroscience, 11, 1478--1484. Nishitani, N., & Hari, R. (2000). Temporal
dynamics of cortical representation for action. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 97, 913--918. Nishitani, N.,
Schürmann, M., Amunts, K., & Hari, R. (2004). Broca's regions: From
action to language. Physiology, 20, 60--69. Nitschke, J. B., Nelson, E.
E., Rusch, B. D., Fox, A. S., Oakes, T. R., & Davidson, R. J. (2004).
Orbitofrontal cortex tracks positive mood in mothers viewing pictures of
their newborn infants. NeuroImage, 21(2), 583--592. Nobre, A. C., Coull,
J. T., Frith, C. D., & Mesulam, M. M. (1999). Orbitofrontal cortex is
activated during breaches of expectation in tasks of visual attention.
Nature Neuroscience, 2, 11--12. Nolte, J. (2008). The human brain: An
introduction to its functional anatomy (6th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Nomura, M., Iidaka, T., Kakehi, K., Tsukiura, T., Hasegawa, T., Maeda,
Y., et al. (2003). Frontal lobe networks for effective processing of
ambiguously expressed emotions in humans. Neuroscience Letters, 348,
113--116. Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., Bermpohl, F., Niese, R., Pfennig,
A., PascualLeone, A., et al. (2004). Reciprocal modulation and
attenuation in the prefrontal cortex: An fMRI study on
emotional-cognitive interaction. Human Brain Mapping, 21, 202--212.
Nottebohm, F. (1981). A brain for all seasons: Cyclical anatomical
changes in song-control nuclei of the canary brain. Science, 214, 1368--
1370.

Oatley, K. (1992). Integrative action of narrative. In D. J. Stein & J.
E. Young (Eds.), Cognitive science and clinical disorders
(pp. 151--172). New York: Academic Press. Oberheim, N. A., Wang, X.,
Goldman, S., & Nedergaard, M. (2006). Astrocytic complexity
distinguishes the human brain. Trends in Neurosciences, 29, 547--553.
O'Brien, J. T. (1997). The "glucocorticoid cascade" hypothesis in man.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 199--201. Ochs, E., & Capps, L.
(2001). Living narrative: Creating lives in everyday storytelling.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Ochsner, K. N., Beer, J. S.,
Robertson, E. R., Cooper, J. C., Gabrieli, J. D.E., Kihlstrom, J. F., et
al. (2005). The neural correlates of direct and reflected
self-knowledge. NeuroImage, 28, 797--814 Ochsner, K. N., Bunge, S. A.,
Gross, J. J., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2002). Rethinking feelings: An fMRI
study of the cognitive regulation of emotion. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 14, 1215--1229. Ochsner, K. N., & Gross, J. J. (2008).
Cognitive emotion regulation. Insights from social cognitive and
affective neuroscience. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
17(2), 153--158. Ochsner, K. N., Ray, R. D., Cooper, J. C., Robertson,
E. R., Chopra, S., Gabrieli, J. D. E., et al. (2004). For better or for
worse: Neural systems supporting the cognitive down-and up-regulation of
negative emotion. NeuroImage, 23, 483--499. O'Doherty, J. (2004). Reward
representation and reward-related learning in the human brain: Insights
from neuroimaging. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 14, 769--776.
O'Doherty, J., Kringelbach, M. L., Rolls, E. T., Hornak, J., & Andrews,
C. (2001). Abstract reward and punishment representations in the human
orbitofrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 95--102. O'Doherty, J. P.,
Deichmann, R., Critchley, H. D., & Dolan, R. J. (2002). Neural responses
during anticipation of a primary taste reward. Neuron, 33, 815--826.
O'Donnell, D., Larocque, S., Seckl, J. R., & Meaney, M. J. (1994).
Postnatal handling alters glucocorticoid, but not mineralocorticoid
messenger RNA expression in the hippocampus of adult rats. Brain
Research. Molecular Brain Research, 26(1--2), 242--248.

Ohman, A., Carlsson, K., Lundqvist, D., & Ingvar, M. (2007). On the
unconscious subcortical origin of human fear. Physiology and Behavior,
92, 180--185. O'Keefe, J., & Nadel, L. (1978). The hippocampus as a
cognitive map. Oxford: Clarendon. Olsson, A., Ebert, J. P., Banaji, M.
R., & Phelps, E. A. (2005). The role of social groups in the persistence
of learned fear. Science, 309, 785--787. Olsson, A., & Phelps, E. A.
(2007). Social learning of fear. Nature Neuroscience, 10, 1095--1102.
Öngür, D., & Price, J. L. (2000). The organization of networks within
the orbital and medial prefrontal cotex of rats, monkeys, and humans.
Cerebral Cortex, 10, 206--219. Ono, T., Nishijo, H., & Uwano, T. (1995).
Amygdala role in conditioned associative learning. Progress in
Neurobiology, 46, 401--422. Orban, G. A., Sunaert, S., Todd, J. T., Van
Hecke, P., & Marchal, G. (1999). Human cortical regions involved in
extracting depth from motion. Neuron, 24, 929--940. Orban, G., Claeys,
K., Nelissen, K., Smans, R., Sunaert, S., Todd, J., et al. (2006).
Mapping the parietal cortex of human and non-human primates.
Neuropsychologia, 44, 2647--2667. Orlinsky, D. E., & Howard, K. J.
(1986). Process and outcome in psychotherapy. In S. L. Garfield & A. E.
Bergin (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change
(pp. 311--381). New York: John Wiley & Sons. Ornitz, E. M., & Pynoos, R.
S. (1989). Startle modulation in children with posttraumatic stress
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 866--870. Ouspensky, P.
D. (1954). The psychology of man's possible evolution. New York: Alfred
Knopf. Ovtscharoff, W., Jr., & Braun, K. (2001). Maternal separation and
social isolation modulate the postnatal development of synaptic
composition in the infralimbic cortex of Octodon degus. Neuroscience,
104, 33--40. Ovtscharoff, W., Helmeke, C., & Braun, K. (2006). Lack of
paternal care affects synaptic development in the anterior cingulate
cortex. Brain Research, 1116, 58--63. Pagnoni, G., Zink, C. F.,
Montague, R., & Berns, G. S. (2002). Activity in human ventral striatum
locked to errors of reward prediction. Nature

Neuroscience, 5, 97--98. Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience:
The foundation of human and animal emotions. New York: Oxford University
Press. Panksepp, J., Nelson, E., & Siviy, S. (1994). Brain opioids and
motherinfant social motivation. Acta Paediatrica, 83(397), 40--46.
Paquette, V., Lévesque, J., Mensour, B., Leroux, J., Beaudoin, G.,
Bourgouin, P., et al. (2003). "Change the mind and you change the
brain": Effects of cognitive-behavioral therapy on the neural correlates
of spider phobia. NeuroImage, 18, 401--409. Parente, R., & Herrmann, D.
(1996). Retraining cognition. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publications.
Pariente, J., White, P., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Lewith, G. (2005).
Expectancy and belief modulate the neuronal substrates of pain treated
by acupuncture. NeuroImage, 25, 1161--1167. Paris, J., Zelkowitz, P.,
Guzder, J., Joseph, S., & Feldman, R. (1999). Neuropsychological factors
associated with borderline pathology in children. Journal of the Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38, 770--774. Park, C. R., Campbell,
A. M., Woodson, J. C., Smith, T. P., Fleshner, M., & Diamond, D. M.
(2006). Permissive influence of stress in the expression of a u-shaped
relationship between serum corticosterone levels and spatial memory
errors in rats. Dose-Response, 4, 55--74. Park, M. K., Hoang, T. A.,
Belluzzi, J. D., & Leslie, F. M. (2003). Gender specific effect of
neonatal handling on stress reactivity of adolescent rats. Journal of
Neuroendocrinology, 15(3), 289--295. Parsons, C. G., Stöffler, A., &
Danysz, W. (2007). Memantine: A NMDA receptor antagonist that improves
memory by restoration of homeostasis in the glutamatergic system---too
little activation is bad, too much is even worse. Neuropharmacology, 53,
699--723. Pascual-Leone, A., Rubio, B., Pallardo, F., & Catala, M. D.
(1996). Rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation of left
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in drug-resistant depression. Lancet,
348, 233--237. Paus, T., Petrides, M., Evans, A. C., & Meyer, E. (1993).
Role of the human anterior cingulate cortex in the control of
oculomotor, manual, and speech responses: A positron emission tomography
study. Journal of Neurophysiology, 70, 453--469.

Pavlides, C., Watanabe, Y., Magarinos, A. M., & McEwen, B. S. (1995).
Opposing roles of the type I and type II adrenal steroid receptors in
hippocampal long-term potentiation. Neuroscience, 68(2), 387--394.
Pawluski, J., & Galea, L. (2006). Hippocampal morphology is
differentially affected by reproductive experience in the mother.
Journal of Neurobiology, 66(1), 71--81. Paz-Alonso, P. M., & Goodman, G.
S. (2008). Trauma and memory: Effects of post-event misinformation,
retrieval order, and retention interval. Memory, 16(1), 58--75. Peers,
P. V., Ludwig, C. J. H., Rorden, C., Cusack, R., Bonfiglioli, C.,
Bundesen, C., et al. (2005). Attentional functions of parietal and
frontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 15, 1469--1484. Pelphrey, K. A.,
Singerman, J. D., Allison, T., & McCarthy, G. (2003). Brain activation
evoked by perception of gaze shifts: The influence of context.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 156--170. Penades, R., Boget, T., Lomena, F.,
Mateos, J., Catalan, R., Gasto, C., et al. (2002). Could the
hypofrontality pattern in schizophrenia be modified through
neuropsychological rehabilitation? Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 105,
202--208. Pencea, V., Bingaman, K. D., Wiegland, S. J., & Luskin, M. B.
(2001). Infusion of brain-derived neurotrophic factor into the lateral
ventricle of the adult rat leads to new neurons in the parenchyma of the
striatum, septum, thalamus, and hypothalamus. Journal of Neuroscience,
21, 6706--6717. Penfield, W., & Perot, P. (1963). The brain's record of
auditory and visual experience. Brain, 86, 595--696. Pennebaker, J. W.
(1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process.
Psychological Science, 8(3), 162--166. Pennebaker, J. W., & Beall, S. K.
(1986). Confronting a traumatic event: Toward an understanding of
inhibition and disease. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95(3), 274--281.
Pennebaker, J. W., Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., & Glaser, R. (1988).
Disclosure of traumas and immune function: Health implications for
psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 239--
245. Pepperberg, I. M. (2008). Alex and Me: How a scientist and a parrot
uncovered a hidden world of animal intelligence---and formed a deep bond
in the process. New York: HarperCollins.

Pérez-Jaranay, J. M., & Vives, F. (1991). Electrophysiological study of
the response of medial prefrontal cortex neurons to stimulation of the
basolateral nucleus of the amygdala in the rat. Brain Research, 564,
97-- 101. Perls, F., Hefferline, R., & Goodman, P. (1951). Gestalt
therapy: Excitement and growth in human personality. New York: Dell.
Perls, T. T., Alpert, L., & Fretts, R. C. (1997). Middle-aged mothers
live longer. Nature, 389, 133. Perrett, D. I., Rolls, E. T., & Caan, W.
(1982). Visual neurons responsive to faces in the monkey temporal
cortex. Experimental Brain Research, 47, 329--342. Perrett, D. I.,
Smith, A. J., Potter, D. D., Mistlin, A. J., Head, A. D., Milner, A. D.,
et al. (1984). Neurons responsive to faces in the temporal cortex:
Studies of functional organization, sensitivity to identity and relation
to perception. Human Neurobiology, 3, 197--208. Perry, B. D., Pollard,
R. A., Blakley, T. I., Baker, W. L., & Vigilante, D. (1995). Childhood
trauma, the neurobiology of adaptation, and "use dependent" development
of the brain: How "states" become "traits." Infant Mental Health
Journal, 16, 271--291. Persinger, M. A., & Makarec, K. (1991). Greater
right hemisphericity is associated with lower self-esteem in adults.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 73, 1244--1246. Pessoa, L. (2008). On the
relationship between emotion and cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
9, 148--158. Petrides, M., Alivisatos, B., & Frey, S. (2002).
Differential activation of the human orbital, mid-ventrolateral, and
mid-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during the processing of visual
stimuli. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 99,
5649--5654. Petrie, K. J., Booth, R. J., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1998). The
immunological effects of thought suppression. Journal of Pesonality and
Social Psychology, 75, 1264--1272. Petrie, K. J., Booth, R. J.,
Pennebaker, J. W., Davison, K. P., & Thomas, M.G. (1995). Disclosure of
trauma and immune response to a hepatitis B vaccination program. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 787--792. Petrovic, P.,
Kelso, E., Petersson, K. M., & Ingvar, M. (2002). Placebo and opioid
analgesia---Imaging a shared neuronal network. Science, 295,

1737--1740. Petty, F., Chae, Y., Kramer, G., Jordan, S., & Wilson, L.
(1994). Learned helplessness sensitizes hippocampal norepinephrine to
mild stress. Biological Psychiatry, 35, 903--908. Pezawas, L.,
Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Drabant, E. M., Verchinski, B. A., Munoz, K. E.,
Kolachana, B. S., et al. (2005). 5-HTTLPR polymorphism impacts human
cingulate-amygdala interactions: A genetic susceptibility mechanism for
depression. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 828--834. Pfrieger, F. W., & Barres,
B. A. (1996). New views on synapse-glia interactions. Current Opinions
in Neurobiology, 6, 615--621. Pham, K., Nacher, J., Hof, P. R., &
McEwen, B. (2003). Repeated restraint stress suppresses neurogenesis and
induces biphasic PSA-NCAM expression in the adult rat dentate gyrus.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 879--886. Pham, T. M., Soderstrom,
S., Henriksson, B. G., & Mohammed, A. H. (1997). Effects of neonatal
stimulation on later cognitive function and hippocampal nerve growth
factor. Behavioral Brain Research, 86, 113--120. Phan, K. L., Britton,
J. C., Taylor, S. F., Fig, L. M., & Liberzon, I. (2006). Corticolimbic
blood flow during nontraumatic emotional processing in post-traumatic
stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 184-- 192. Phan, K.
L., Fitzegerald, D., Nathan, P., Moore, G., Uhde, T., & Tancer, M.
(2005). Neural substrates for voluntary suppression of negative affect:
A functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Biological Psychiatry,
57, 210--219. Phan, K. L., Wager, T., Taylor, S. F., & Liberzon, I.
(2002). Functional neuroanatomy of emotion: A meta-analysis of emotion
activation studies in PET and fMRI. NeuroImage, 16, 331--348. Phelps, E.
A. (2006). Emotion and cognition: Insights from studies of the human
amygdala. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 27--53. Phelps, E. A., &
Anderson, A. K. (1997). Emotional memory: What does the amygdala do?
Current Biology, 7, R311--R314. Phelps, E. A., Delgado, M. R., Nearing,
K. I., & LeDoux, J. E. (2004). Extinction learning in humans: Role of
the amygdala and vmPFC. Neuron, 43, 897--905. Phelps, E., Ling, S., &
Carrasco, M. (2006). Emotion facilitates perception and potentiates the
perceptual benefits of attention.

Psychological Science, 17(4), 292--299. Phillips, D. P., Ruth, T. E., &
Wagner, L. M. (1993). Psychology and survival. The Lancet, 342,
1142--1145. Pia, L., Neppi-Modona, M., Ricci, R., & Berti, A. (2004).
Special issue: The anatomy of anosognosia for hemiplegia: A
meta-analysis. Cortex, 40, 367--377. Piazza, M., Izard, V., Pinel, P.,
Le Bihan, D., & Dehaene, S. (2004). Tuning curves for approximate
numerosity in the human intraparietal sulcus. Neuron, 44, 547--555.
Pilowsky, D. J., Wickramaratne, P., Talati, A., Tang, M., Hughes, C. W.,
Garber, J., et al. (2008). Children of depressed mothers 1 year after
the initiation of maternal treatment: Findings from the STAR\*D-Child
study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 1136--1147. Pissiota, A.,
Frans, O., Fernandez, M., von Knorring, L., Fischer, H., & Fredrikson,
M. (2002). Neurofunctional correlates of posttraumatic stress disorder:
A PET symptom provocation study. European Archives of Psychiatry and
Clinical Neuroscience, 252, 68--75. Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., van der
Kolk, B. A., Greenberg, M. S., Meyerhoff, J. L., & Mougey, E. H. (1990).
Analgesia: A new dependent variable for the biological study of
posttraumatic stress disorder. In M. E. Wolf & A. D. Mosnaim (Eds.),
Posttraumatic stress disorder: Etiology, phenomenology, and treatment
(pp. 140--147). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Pittenger,
C., & Duman, R. S. (2008). Stress, depression, and neuroplasticity: A
convergence of mechanisms. Neuropsychopharmacology, 33, 88--109.
Pizzagalli, D., Pascual-Marqui, R. D., Nitschke, J. B., Oakes, T. R.,
Larson, C. L., Abercrombie, H. C., et al. (2001). Anterior cingulate
activity as a predictor of degree of treatment reponse in major
depression: Evidence from brain electrical tomography analysis. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 405--415. Platt, M. L., & Glimcher, P. W.
(1999). Neural correlates of decision variables in parietal cortex.
Nature, 400, 233--238. Ploj, K., Roman, E., Bergstrom, L., & Nylander,
I. (2001). Effects of neonatal handling on nociceptin/orphanin FQ and
opioid peptide levels in female rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and
Behavior, 69, 173--179.

Plotsky, P. M., & Meaney, M. J. (1993). Early, postnatal experience
alters hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) MRNA, median
eminence CRF content and stress-induced release in adult rats. Molecular
Brain Research, 18, 195--200. Pochon, J. B., Levy, R., Fossati, P.,
Lehericy, S., Poline, J. B., Pillon, B., et al. (2002). The neural
system that bridges reward and cognition in humans: An fMRI study.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 99(8), 5669-5674.
Polley, D. B., Chen-Bee, C. H., & Frostig, R. D. (1999). Two directions
of plasticity in the sensory-deprived adult cortex. Neuron, 24,
623--637. Pope, S. K., Whiteside, L., Brooks-Gunn, J., Kelleher, K. J.,
Rickert, V. I., Bradley, R. H., et al. (1993). Low-birth-weight infants
born to adolescent mothers. Effects of coresidency with grandmother on
child development. Journal of the American Medical Association, 269,
1396--1400. Popescu, A. T., Saghyan, A. A., & Paré, D. (2007).
NMDA-dependent facilitation of corticostriatal plasticity by the
amygdala. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 104(1),
341--346. Porges, S. W. (2007). The polyvagal perspective. Biological
Psychology, 74(2), 116--143. Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., &
Maiti, A. K. (1994). Vagal tone and the physiological regulation of
emotion. In N. Fox (Ed.), Biological and behavioral foundations of
emotion regulation. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59(2--3, Serial No. 240, pp. 167--186). Porges, S. W.,
Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., Portales, A. L., & Greenspan, S. I. (1996).
Infant regulation of the vagal "brake" predicts child behavior problems:
A psychobiological model of social behavior. Developmental
Psychobiology, 29, 697--712. Porto, P. R., Oliveria, L., Mari, J.,
Volchan, E., Figueira, I., & Ventura, P. (2009). Does cognitive behavior
therapy change the brain? A systematic review of neuroimaging in anxiety
disorders. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 21,
114--125. Post, R. M., & Weiss, S. R. B. (1997). Emergent properties of
neural systems: How focal molecular neurobiological alterations can
affect behavior. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 907--929. Post, R.
M., Weiss, S. R. B., Li, H., Smith, A., Zhang, L. X., Xing, G., et
al. (1998). Neural plasticity and emotional memory. Development and

Psychopathology, 10, 829--855. Prasko, J., Horácek, J., Zálesky, R.,
Kopecek, M., Novák, T., Pasková, B., et al. (2004). The change of
regional brain metabolism (18FDG PET) in panic disorder during the
treatment with cognitive behavioral therapy or anidepressants.
Neuroendocrinology Letters, 25, 340--348. Pribram, K. H. (1991). Brain
and perception: Holonomy and structure in figural processing. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum. Pribram, K. H., & Gill, M. M. (1976). Freud's "Project"
re-assessed: Preface to contemporary cognitive theory and
neuropsychology. New York: Basic Books. Price, B. H., Daffner, K. R.,
Stowe, R. M., & Mesulam, M. M. (1990). The comportmental learning
disabilities of early frontal lobe damage. Brain, 113, 1383--1393.
Price, J. L., Carmichael, S. T., & Drevets, W. C. (1996). Networks
related to the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex; a substrate for
emotional behavior? Progress in Brain Research, 107, 523--536.
Prickaerts, J., Koopmans, G., Blokland, A., & Scheepens, A. (2004).
Learning and adult neurogenesis: Survival with or without proliferation?
Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 81, 1--11. Pruessner, J. C.,
Baldwin, M. W., Dedovic, K., Renwick, R., Mahani, N. K., Lord, C., et
al. (2005). Self-esteem, locus of control, hippocampal volume, and
cortisol regulation in young and old adulthood. NeuroImage, 28,
815--826. Pulver, S. E. (2003). On the astonishing clinical irrelevance
of neuroscience. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 51,
755--772. Purves, D., & Lichtman, J. (1980). Elimination of synapses in
the developing nervous system. Science, 210, 153--157. Purves, D., &
Voyvodic, J. T. (1987). Imaging mammalian nerve cells and their
connections over time in living animals. Trends in Neurosciences, 10,
398--404. Quintana, J., & Fuster, J. M. (1999). From perception to
action: Temporal integrative functions of prefrontal and parietal
neurons. Cerebral Cortex, 9, 213--221. Quirk, G. J., & Beer, J. S.
(2006). Prefrontal involvement in the regulation of emotion: Convergence
of rat and human studies. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 16, 723--727.

Quirk, G. J., Likhtik, E., Pelletier, J. G., & Pare, D. (2003).
Stimulation of medial prefrontal cortex decreases the responsiveness of
central amygdala output neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 23,
8800--8807. Radecki, D. T., Brown, L. M., Martinez, J., & Teyler, T. J.
(2005). BDNF protects against stress-induced impairments in spatial
learning and memory and LTP. Hippocampus, 15(2), 246--253. Radley, J.
J., Rocher, A. B., Miller, M., Janssen, W. G. M., Liston, C., Hof, P.
R., et al. (2006). Repeated stress induces dendritic spine loss in the
rat medial prefrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 16, 313--320. Raine, A.,
Buchsbaum, M. S., Stanley, J., Lottenberg, S., Abel, L., & Stoddard, J.
(1994). Selective reductions in prefrontal glucose metabolism in
murderers. Biological Psychiatry, 36, 365--373. Rainnie, D. G.,
Bergeron, R., Sajdyk, T. J., Patil, M., Gehlert, D. R., & Shekhar, A.
(2004). Corticotrophin releasing factor-induced synaptic plasticity in
the amygdala translates stress into emotional disorders. Journal of
Neuroscience, 24, 3471--3479. Rakic, P. (1985). Limits of neurogenesis
in primates. Science, 227, 154-- 156. Ramachandran, V. S.,
Rogers-Ramachandran, D., & Stewart, M. (1992). Perceptual correlates of
massive cortical reorganization. Science, 258, 1159--1160. Rampon, C.,
Jiang, C. H., Dong, H., Tang Y. P., Lockhart, D. J., Schultz, P.G., et
al. (2000). Effects of environmental enrichment on gene expression in
the brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 97,
12880--12884. Ranote, S., Elliott, R., Abel, K. M., Mitchell, R.,
Deakin, J. F. W., & Appleby, L. (2004). The neural basis of maternal
responsiveness to infants: An fMRI study. Neuroreport, 15, 1825--1829.
Rao, V. R., & Finkbeiner, S. (2007). NMDA and AMPA receptors: Old
channels, new tricks. Trends in Neurosciences, 30, 284--291. Rau, V., &
Fanselow, M. S. (2007). Neurobiological and neuroethological
perspectives on fear and anxiety. In L. J. Kirmayer, R. Lemelson, & M.
Barad (Eds.), Understanding trauma: Integrating biological, clinical,
and cultural perspectives (pp. 27--40). New York: Cambridge University
Press. Rauch, S. L., Jenike, M. A., Alpert, N. M., Baer, L., Breiter, H.
C. R., Savage, C. R., et al. (1994). Regional cerebral blood flow
measured during

symptom provocation in obsessive-compulsive disorder using oxygen
15labeled carbon dioxide and positron emission tomography. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 51, 62--70. Rauch, S. L., Shin, L. M., & Phelps, E.
A. (2006). Neurocircuitry models of posttraumatic stress disorder and
extinction: human neuroimaging research---past, present, and future.
Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 60, 376--382. Rauch, S. L., Shin, L.
M., Segal, E., Pitman, R. K., Carson, M. A., McMullin, K., et
al. (2003). Selectively reduced regional cortical volumes in
post-traumatic stress disorder. NeuroReport, 14, 913--916. Rauch, S. L.,
van der Kolk, B. A., Fisler, R. E., Alpert, N. M., Orr, S. P., Savage,
C. R., et al. (1996). A symptom provocation study of posttraumatic
stress disorder using positron emission tomography and script-driven
imagery. Archive of General Psychiatry, 53, 380--387. Rees, G., Kreiman,
G., & Koch, C. (2002). Neural correlates of consciousness in humans.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 261--270. Rees, S. L., Steiner, M., &
Fleming, A. S. (2006). Early deprivation, but not maternal separation,
attenuates rise in corticosterone levels after exposure to a novel
environment in both juvenile and adult female rats. Behavioral Brain
Research, 175(2), 383--391. Regard, M., Oelz, O., Brugger, P., & Landis,
T. (1989). Persistent cognitive impairment in climbers after repeated
exposure to extreme altitude. Neurology, 39, 210--213. Reich, W. (1945).
Character analysis. New York: Simon & Schuster. Reiman, E. M., Raichle,
M. E., Robins, E., Mintun, M. A., Fusselman, M.J., Fox, P. T., et
al. (1989). Neuroanatomical correlates of a lactateinduced anxiety
attack. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 493--500. Resnick, H. S.,
Yehuda, R., Pitman, R. K., & Foy, D. W. (1995). Effects of previous
trauma on acute plasma cortisol level following rape. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 152, 1675--1677. Ressler, K. J., Rothbaum, B. O.,
Tannenbaum, L., Anderson, P., Graap, K., Zimand, E., et al. (2004).
Cognitive enhancers as adjuncts to psychotherapy. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 61, 1136--1144. Rezai, K., Andreasen, N. C., Alliger, R.,
Cohen, G., Swayze, V., & O'Leary, D. S. (1993). The neuropsychology of
the prefrontal cortex. Archives of Neurology, 50, 636--642.

Richards, M., & Deary, I. J. (2005). A life course approach to cognitive
reserve: A model for cognitive aging and development? Annals of
Neurology, 58, 617--622. Rilling, J. K., Gutman, D. A., Zeh, T. R.,
Panoni, G., Berns, G. S., & Kilts, C. D. (2002). A neural basis for
social cooperation. Neuron, 35, 395-- 405. Rizzolatti, G., & Arbib, M.
A. (1998). Language within our grasp. Trends in Neurosciences, 21,
188--194. Rizzolatti, G., & Sinigaglia, C. (2008). Mirrors in our brain:
How our minds share actions and emotions. New York: Oxford University
Press. Roberts, A. C., & Wallis, J. D. (2000). Inhibitory control and
affective processing in the prefrontal cortex: Neuropsychological
studies in the common marmoset. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 252--262. Robinson,
R. G., Kubos, K. L., Starr, L. B., Rao, K., & Price, T. R. (1984). Mood
disorder in stroke patient: Importance of location of lesion. Brain, 1,
91--93. Roffman, J. L., Marci, C. D., Glick, D. M., Dougherty, D. D., &
Rauch, S.L. (2005). Neuroimaging and the functional neuroanatomy of
psychotherapy. Psychological Medicine, 35, 1--14. Rogan, M. T., &
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). Emotion: Systems, cells, synaptic plasticity.
Cell, 85, 469--475. Rogan, M. T., Staubli, U. V., & LeDoux, J. E.
(1997). Fear conditioning induces associative long-term potentiation in
the amygdala. Nature, 390, 604--607. Rogers, A. R. (1993). Why
menopause? Evolutionary Ecology, 7, 406-- 420. Rogers, C. R. (1942).
Counseling and psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Rogers, R. D.,
Ramnani, N., Mackay, C., Wilson, J. L., Jezzard, P., Carter, C. S., et
al. (2004). Distinct portions of anterior cingulate cortex and medial
prefrontal cortex are activated by reward processing in separable phases
of decision-making cognition. Biological Psychiatry, 55, 594--602.
Rokeach, M. (1964). The three Christs of Ypsilanti. New York: Columbia
University Press. Roozendaal, B. (1999). Glucocorticoids and the
regulation of memory consolidation. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 25,
213--238.

Ropper, A. H., & Brown, R. H. (2005). Adams and Victor's principles of
neurology. New York: McGraw-Hill. Rorden, C., Mattingley, J., Karnath,
H., & Driver, J. (1997). Visual extinction and prior entry: Impaired
perception of temporal order with intact motion perception after
unilateral parietal damage. Neuropsychologia, 35, 421--433. Rosenkranz,
J. A., Moore, H., & Grace, A. A. (2003). The prefrontal cortex regulates
lateral amygdala neuronal plasticity and responses to previously
conditioned stimuli. Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 11054--11064.
Rosenzweig, M. R. (2001). Learning and neural plasticity over the life
span. In P. E. Gold & W. T. Greenough (Eds.), Memory consolidation:
Essays in honor of James L. McGauggh. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Ross, E. D., Homan, R. W., & Buck, R. (1994).
Differential hemispheric lateralization of primary and social emotions:
Implications for developing a comprehensive neurology for emotions,
repression, and the subconscious. Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and
Behavioral Neurology, 7, 1--19. Rossi, E. L. (1993). The psychobiology
of mind-body healing. New York: Norton. Rothbart, M. K., Taylor, S. B.,
& Tucker, D. M. (1989). Right-sided facial asymmetry in infant emotional
expression. Neuropsychologia, 27, 675--687. Royer, S., Martina, M., &
Paré, D. (1999). An inhibitory interface gates impulse traffic between
the input and output stations of the amygdala. Journal of Neuroscience,
19, 10575--10583. Rubens, A. B. (1985). Caloric stimulation and
unilateral visual neglect. Neurology, 35, 1019--1024. Rubia, K.,
Overmeyer, S., Taylor, E., Brammer, M., Williams, S., Simmons, A., et
al. (1999). Hypofrontality in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
during higher-order motor control: A study with functional MRI. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 891--896. Rubino, G. J., Farahani, K.,
McGill, D., Van de Wiele, B., Villablanca, J. P., & Wang-Maithieson, A.
(2000). Magnetic resonance imaging-guided neurosurgery in the magnetic
fringe fields: The next step in neuronavigation. Neurosurgery, 46,
643--654. Ruby, P., & Decety, J. (2001). Effect of subjective
perspective taking during simulation of action: A PET investigation of
agency. Nature

Neuroscience, 4, 546--550. Rushworth, M. F. S., & Behrens, T. E. J.
(2008). Choice, uncertainty and value in prefrontal and cingulate
cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 11, 389-- 397. Rushworth, M. F. S., Krams,
M., & Passingham, R. E. (2001). The attentional role of the left
parietal cortex: The distinct lateralization and localization of motor
attention in the human brain. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13,
698--710. Russo-Neustadt, A. A., Beard, R. C., Huang, Y. M., & Cotman,
C. W. (2000). Physical activity and antidepressant treatment potentiate
the expression of specific brain-derived neurotrophic factor transcripts
in the rat hippocampus. Neuroscience, 101(2), 305--312. Rutter, M., &
Rutter, M. (1993). Developing minds: Challenge and continuity across the
life span. New York: Basic Books. Ryan, W. (1971). Blaming the victim.
New York: Pantheon Books. Saba, G., Rocamora, J. F., Kalalou, K.,
Benadhira, R., Plaze, M., & Lipski, H. (2004). Repetitive transcranical
magnetic stimulation as an addon therapy in the treatment of mania: A
case series of eight patients. Psychiatry Research, 128, 199--202.
Sabbagh, M. A. (2004). Understanding orbitofrontal contributions to
theory-of-mind reasoning: Implications for autism. Brain and Cognition,
55, 209--219. Sackeim, H. A., Putz, E., Vingiano, W., Coleman, E., &
McElhiney, M. (1988). Lateralization in the processing of emotionally
laden information. I. Normal functioning. Neuropsychiatry,
Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology, 1(2), 97--110. Sackheim, H.
A., Greenberg, M. S., Weiman, A. L., Gur, R. C., Hungerbuhler, J. P., &
Geschwind, N. (1982). Hemispheric asymmetry in the expression of
positive and negative emotions: Neurologic evidence. Archives of
Neurology, 39, 210--218. Sakai, Y., Kumano, H., Nishikawa, M., Sakano,
Y., Kaiya, H., Imavayashi, E., et al. (2006). Changes in cerebral
glucose utilization in patients with panic disorder treated with
cognitive-behavioral therapy. NeuroImage, 33, 218--226. Sakamoto, H.,
Fukuda, R., Okuaki, T., Rogers, M., Kasai, K., Machida, T., et
al. (2005). Parahippocampal activation evoked by masked traumatic

images in posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional MRI study.
NeuroImage, 26, 813--821. Salm, A. K., Modney, B. K., & Hatton, G. I.
(1988). Alterations in supraoptic nucleus ultrastructure of maternally
behaving virgin rats. Brain Research Bulletin, 21, 685--691. Santini,
E., Ge, H., Ren, K., Peña de Ortiz, S., & Quirk, G. L. (2004).
Consolidation of fear extinction requires protein synthesis in the
medial prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 5704--5710.
Sapolsky, R. M. (1985). A mechanism for glucocorticoid toxicity in the
hippocampus: Increased neuronal vulnerability to metabolic insults.
Journal of Neuroscience, 5, 1228--1232. Sapolsky, R. M. (1987).
Glucocorticoids and hippocampal damage. Trends in Neurosciences, 10,
346--349. Sapolsky, R. M. (1990). Stress in the wild. Scientific
American, 262(1), 116--123. Sapolsky, R. M. (1996). Why stress is bad
for your brain. Science, 273, 749--750. Sapolsky, R. M. (2004).
Mothering style and methylation. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 791--792.
Sapolsky, R. M., Krey, L. C., & McEwen, B. S. (1984).
Glucocorticoidsensitive hippocampal neurons are involved in terminating
the adrenocortical stress response. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA, 81, 6174--6177. Sapolsky, R. M., Uno, H., Rebert, C.
S., & Finch, C. E. (1990). Hippocampal damage associated with prolonged
glucocorticoid exposure in primates. Journal of Neuroscience, 10,
2897--2902. Sarrieau, A., Sharma, S., & Meaney, M. J. (1988). Postnatal
development and environmental regulation of hippocampal glucocorticoid
and mineralocorticoid receptors. Developmental Brain Research, 43, 158--
162. Sarter, M., & Markowitsch, H. J. (1985). The amygdala's role in
human mnemonic processing. Cortex, 21, 7--24. Satterfield, J. H., &
Dawson, M. E. (1971). Electrodermal correlates of hyperactivity in
children. Psychophysiology, 8, 191--197. Sauseng, P., Klimesch, W.,
Schabus, M., & Doppelmayr, M. (2005). Frontoparietal EEG coherence in
theta and upper alpha reflect central

executive functions of working memory. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 57, 97--103. Saxe, G. N., Chinman, G., Berkowitz, R.,
Hall, K., Leiberg, G., Schwartz, J., et al. (1994). Somatization in
patients with dissociative disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry,
151, 1329--1333. Saxena, S., Brody, A. L., Ho, M. L., Zohrabi, N.,
Maidment, K. M., & Baxter, L. R. (2003). Differential brain metabolic
predictors of response to paroxetine in obsessive-compulsive disorder,
versus major depression. American Journal Psychiatry, 160, 522--532.
Scarmeas, N., Zarahn, E., Anderson, K. E., Honig, L. S., Park, A.,
Hilton, J., et al. (2004). Cognitive reserve-mediated modulation of
positron emission tomographic activations during memory tasks in
Alzheimer disease. Archives of Neurology, 61, 73--78. Schaaf, M. J. M.,
de Kloet, E. R., & Vregeudenhil, E. (2000). Corticosterone effects on
BDNF expression in the hippocampus. Implications for memory formation.
Stress, 3(3), 201--208. Schacter, D. L. (1976). The hypnagogic state: A
critical review of the literature. Psychological Bulletin, 83, 452--481.
Schacter, D. L. (1986). Amnesia and crime. American Psychologist, 41,
286--295. Schacter, D. L. (1996). Searching for memory: The brain, the
mind, and the past. New York: Basic Books. Schaefer, S. M., Jackson, D.
C., Davidson, R. J., Aguirre, G. K., Kimberg, D.Y., & Thompson-Schill,
S. L. (2002). Modulation of amygdalar activity by the conscious
regulation of negative emotion. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14,
913--921. Schaie, K. W., & Willis, S. L. (1986). Can decline in adult
intellectual functioning be reversed? Developmental Psychology, 22,
223--232. Schall, J. D. (2001). Neural basis of deciding, choosing and
acting. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 33--42. Schiffer, F., Teicher,
M. H., & Papanicolaou, A. C. (1995). Evoked potential evidence for right
brain activity during the recall of traumatic memories. Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 7, 169-- 175. Schmahmann, J.
D. (1997). The cerebellum and cognition. New York: Academic Press.

Schmand, B., Smit, J. H., Geerlings, M. I., & Lindeboom, J. (1997). The
effects of intelligence and education on the development of dementia: A
test of the brain reserve hypothesis. Psychological Medicine, 27,
1337--1344. Schneider, M. L. (1992). Prenatal stress exposure alters
postnatal behavioral expression under conditions of novelty challenge in
rhesus monkey infants. Developmental Psychobiology, 25, 529--540.
Schore, A. N. (1994). Affect regulation and the origin of the self: The
neurobiology of emotional development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Schore,
A. N. (1997a). Early organization of the nonlinear right brain and
development of a predisposition to psychiatric disorders. Development
and Psychopathology, 9, 595--631. Schore, A. N. (1997b). A century after
Freud's project for a scientific psychology: Is a rapprochement between
psychoanalysis and neurobiology at hand? Journal of the American
Psychoanalytic Association, 45, 841--867. Schore, A. N. (2000).
Attachment and the regulation of the right brain. Attachment and Human
Development, 2, 23--47. Schore, J., & Schore, A. (2008). Modern
attachment theory: The central role of affect regulation in development
and treatment. Clinical Social Work Journal, 36, 9--20. Schrott, L. M.
(1997). Effect of training and environment on brain morphology and
behavior. Acta Paediatrica Scandanavia, 422 (Suppl.), 45-- 47. Schrott,
L. M., Denenberg, V. H., Sherman, G. F., Waters, N. S., Rosen, G.D., &
Galaburda, A. M. (1992). Environmental enrichment, neocortical ectopias,
and behavior in the autoimmune NZB mouse. Developmental Brain Research,
67, 85--93. Schultz, R. T., Gauthier, I., Klin, A., Fulbright, R. K.,
Anderson, A. W., Volkmar, F., et al. (2000). Abnormal ventral temporal
cortical activity during face discrimination among individuals with
autism and Asperger syndrome. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57,
331--340. Schultz, W. (1998). Predictive reward signal of dopamine
neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 80, 1--27. Schultz, W., Apicella,
P., Scarnati, E., & Ljunberg, T. (1992). Neuronal activity in monkey
ventral striatum related to the expectation of reward. Journal of
Neuroscience, 12, 4595--4610. Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R.
(1997). A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science, 275,
1593--1599.

Schultz, W., Tremblay, L., & Hollerman, J. R. (2000). Reward processing
in primate orbitofrontal cortex and basal ganglia. Cerebral Cortex, 10,
272--283. Schulz, K. P., Fan, J., Tang, C. Y, Newcorn, J. H., Buchsbaum,
M. S., Cheung, A. M., et. al. (2004). Response inhibition in adolescents
diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder during
childhood: An eventrelated fMRI study. American Journal of Psychiatry,
161, 1650--1657. Schutter, D. J. L. G. (2009). Antidepressant efficacy
of high-frequency transcranial magnetic stimulation over the left
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in double-blind sham-controlled designs:
A meta analysis. Psychological Medicine, 39, 65--75. Schuz, A. (1978).
Some facts and hypotheses concerning dendritic spines and learning. In
M. A. B. Braizer & H. Petsche (Eds.), Architectonics of the cerebral
cortex (pp. 129--135). New York: Raven. Schwartz, D. A. (1979). The
suicidal character. Psychiatric Quarterly, 51, 64--70. Schwartz, J. M.
(1996). Brain lock: Free yourself from obsessivecompulsive behaviors.
New York: ReganBooks. Schwartz, J. M., Stoessel, P. W., Baxter, L. R.,
Martin, K. M., & Phelps, M.E. (1996). Systematic changes in cerebral
glucose metabolic rate after successful behavior modification treatment
of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53,
109--113. Schwartz, S. (1964). Effects of neonatal cortical lesions and
early environmental factors on adult rat behavior. Journal of
Comparative Physiological Psychology, 57, 72--77. Schwartz, S., Assal,
F., Valenza, N., Seghier, M. L., & Vuilleumier, P. (2005). Illusory
persistence of touch after right parietal damage: Neural correlates of
tactile awareness. Brain, 128, 277--290. Sear, R., Mace, R., & McGregor,
I. A. (2000). Maternal grandmothers improve nutritional status and
survival of children in rural Gambia. Proceedings Biological Sciences,
The Royal Society, 267, 1641--1647. Searleman, A. (1977). A review of
right hemisphere linguistic capabilities. Psychological Bulletin, 84,
503--528. Seidman, L. J., Faracone, S. V., Goldstein, J. M., Goodman, J.
M., Kremen, W. S., Toomey, R., et al. (1999). Thalamic and
amygdalahippocampal volume reductions in first-degree relatives of
patients with

schizophrenia: An MRI-based morphometric analysis. Biological
Psychiatry, 46, 941--954. Seidman, L. J., Valera, E. M., & Makris, N.
(2005). Structural brain imaging of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 1263--1272. Seitz, R. J., Nickel,
J., & Azari, N. P. (2006). Functional modularity of the medial
prefrontal cortex: Involvement in human empathy. Neuropsychology, 20,
743--751. Selden, N. R. W., Everitt, B. J., Jarrard, L. E., & Robbins,
T. W. (1991). Complimentary roles for the amygdala and hippocampus in
aversive conditioning to explicit and contextual cues. Neuroscience, 42,
335--350. Selye, H. (1979). The stress of my life. New York: Van
Nostrand. Semmes, J. (1968). Hemispheric specialization: A possible clue
to mechanism. Neuropsychologia, 6, 11--26. Sergent, J. (1986).
Subcortical coordination of hemispheric activity in commissurotomized
patients. Brain, 109, 357--369. Sergent, J. (1990). Furtive incursions
into bicameral minds. Brain, 113, 537--568. Serieux, P., & Capgras, J.
(1909). Misinterpretive delusional states. In Les folies raisonnantes:
Le delire d'interpretation (pp. 5--43). Paris: Balliere. Shapiro, D.,
Jamner, L. D., & Spence, S. (1997). Cerebral laterality, repressive
coping, autonomic arousal, and human bonding. Acta Scandinavica
Physiologica, 640(Suppl.), 60--64. Shapiro, F. (1995). Eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing: Basic principles, protocols, and
procedures. New York: Guilford. Shatz, C. J. (1990). Impulse activity
and patterning of connections during CNS development. Neuron, 5,
745--756. Sheline, Y. I., Gado, M. H., & Price, J. L. (1998). Amygdala
core nuclei volumes are decreased in recurrent major depression.
NeuroReport, 9, 2023--2028. Sheline, Y. I., Wang, P. W., Gado, M. H.,
Csernansky, J. G., & Vannier, M.W. (1996). Hippocampal atrophy in
recurrent major depression. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 93, 3908--3913. Shenton, M. E., Kikinis, R., Jolesz, F.
A., Pollak, S. D., LeMay, M., Wible, C. G., et al. (1992). Abnormalities
of the left temporal lobe and

thought disorder in schizophrenia: A quantitative magnetic resonance
imaging study. New England Journal of Medicine, 327, 604--612. Sherry,
D. F., Jacobs, L. F., & Gaulin, S. J. C. (1992). Spatial memory and
adaptive specialization of the hippocampus. Trends in Neurosciences, 15,
298--303. Sherry, D. F., & Schacter, D. L. (1987). The evolution of
multiple memory systems. Psychological Review, 94, 439--454. Shilony,
E., & Grossman, F. K. (1993). Depersonalization as a defense mechanism
in survivors of trauma. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 6, 119--128. Shima,
K., & Tanji, J. (1998). Role for cingulate motor area cells in voluntary
movement selection based on reward. Science, 282, 1335--1338. Shin, L.
M., Rauch, S. L., & Pitman, R. K. (2006). Amygdala, medial prefrontal
cortex, and hippocampal function in PTSD. Annals of the New York Academy
of Science, 1071, 67--79. Shmuelof, L., & Zohary, E. (2006). A mirror
representation of others' actions in the human anterior parietal cortex.
Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 9736--9742. Siegel, D. J. (1995). Trauma
and psychotherapy: A cognitive sciences view. Journal of Psychotherapy
Practice and Research, 4, 93--122. Siegel, D. J. (1996). Cognition,
memory, and dissociation. Child and Adolescent Clinics of North America,
5, 509--536. Siegel, D. J. (1999). Developing mind: Toward a
neurobiology of interpersonal experience. New York: Guilford. Silberman,
E. K., & Weingartner, H. (1986). Hemispheric lateralization of functions
related to emotion. Brain and Cognition, 5, 322--353. Simon, O., Mangin,
J., Cohen, L., Le Bihan, D., & Dehaene, S. (2002). Topographical layout
of hand, eye, calculation, and language-related areas in the human
parietal lobe. Neuron, 33, 475--487. Simpson, J. R., Drevets, W. C.,
Snyder, A. Z., Gusnard, D. A., & Raichle, M. E. (2001). Emotion-induced
changes in human medial prefrontal cortex: II. During anticipatory
anxiety. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 98,
688--693. Simpson, J. R., Snyder, A. Z., Gusnard, D. A., & Raichle, M.
E. (2001). Emotion-induced changes in human medial prefrontal cortex: I.
During cognitive task performance. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA, 98, 683--687.

Sirevaag, A. M., & Greenough, W. T. (1988). A multivariate statistical
summary of synaptic plasticity measures in rats exposed to complex,
social and individual environments. Brain Research, 441, 386--392.
Sirigu, A., Daprati, E., Ciancia, S., Giraux, P., Nighoghossian, N., &
Posada, A., et al. (2003). Altered awareness of voluntary action after
damage to the parietal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 80--84. Sirigu,
A., Duhamel, J., Coehn, L., Pillon, B., Dubois, B., & Agid, Y. (1996).
The mental representation of hand movements after parietal cortex
damage. Science, 273, 1564--1568. Siviy, S. M., & Harrison, K. A.
(2008). Effects of neonatal handling on play behavior and fear towards a
predator odor in juvenile rats (rattus norvegicus). Journal of
Comparative Psychology, 122(1), 1--8. Smith, S. D., & Bulman-Fleming, M.
B. (2004). A hemispheric asymmetry for the unconscious perception of
emotion. Brain and Cognition, 55, 452--457. Smythe, J. W., Rowe, W. B.,
& Meaney, M. J. (1994). Neonatal handling alters serotonin (5-HT)
turnover and 5-HT2 receptor binding in selected brain regions:
Relationship to the handling effect on glucocorticoid receptor
expression. Developmental Brain Research, 80, 183--189. Snyder, J., &
Chatterjee, A. (2004). Spatial-temporal anisometries following right
parietal damage. Neuropsychologia, 42, 1703--1708. Snyder, L. H.,
Batista, A. P., & Andersen, R. A. (1997). Coding of intention in the
posterior parietal cortex. Nature, 386, 167--170. Solomon, Z. (1990).
Back to the front: Recurrent exposure to combat stress and reactivation
of posttraumatic stress disorder. In M. E. Wolf & A. D. Mosnaim (Eds.).
Posttraumatic stress disorder: Etiology, phenomenology, and treatment
(pp. 114--125). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Sontheimer,
H. (1995). Glial influences on neuronal signaling. The Neuroscientist,
1, 123--126. Spangler, G., & Grossman, K. E. (1993). Biobehavioral
organization in securely and insecurely attached infants. Child
Development, 64, 1439-- 1450. Spangler, G., & Schieche, M. (1998).
Emotional and adrenocortical responses of infants to the strange
situation: The differential function of emotional expression.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 22, 681--706.

Spear, L. P. (2000). The adolescent brain and age-related behavioral
manifestations. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 24, 417--463.
Specter, M. (2001, July 23). Rethinking the brain. The New Yorker, 42--
53. Sperry, R. W. (1968). Hemispheric deconnection and unity in
conscious awareness. American Psychologist, 23, 723--733. Sperry, R. W.,
Gazzaniga, M. S., & Bogen, J. E. (1969). Interhemispheric relationships:
The neocortical commissures; syndromes of hemisphere disconnection. In
P. J. Vinken & G. W. Bruyn (Eds.), Handbook of clinical neurology (Vol.
4, pp. 273--290). Amsterdam: North Holland. Spitz, R. (1946).
Hospitalism: A follow-up report on investigation described in volume I,
1945. Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 2, 113--117. Squire, L. R.
(1987). Memory and brain. New York: Oxford University Press. Squire, L.
R., & Zola-Morgan, S. (1991). The medial temporal lobe memory system.
Science, 253, 2380--2386. Staff, R. T., Murray, A. D., Deary, I. J., &
Whalley, L. J. (2004). What provides cerebral reserve? Brain, 127,
1191--1199. Stahl, S. M. (2008). Stahl's essential psychopharmacology.
Neuroscientific basis and practical applications. New York: Cambridge
University Press. Stamatakis, A., Pondiki, S., Kitraki, E.,
Diamantopoulou, A., Panagiotaropoulos, T., Raftogianni, A., et
al. (2008). Effect of neonatal handling on adult rat spatial learning
and memory following acute stress. Stress, 11(2), 148--159. St. Clair,
M. (1986). Object relations and self psychology. Monterey, CA:
Brooks/Cole. Stein, M. B., Koverola, C., Hanna, C., Torchia, M. G., &
McClarty, B. (1997). Hippocampal volume in women victimized by childhood
sexual abuse. Psychological Medicine, 27, 951--959. Stennett, R. G.
(1957). The relationship of performance level to level of arousal.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54(1), 54--61. Stephan, H., & Andy,
O. J. (1977). Quantitative comparison of the amygdala in insectivores
and primates. Acta Anatomica, 98, 130--153. Stern, D. N. (1985). The
interpersonal world of the infant. New York: Basic Books.

Stern, D. N. (1995). The motherhood constellation. New York: Basic
Books. Stern, Y., Alexander, G. E., Prohovnik, I., & Mayeux, R. (1992).
Inverse relationship between education and parietotemporal perfusion
deficit in Alzheimer's disease. Annals of Neurology, 32, 371--375.
Stern, Y., Alexander, G. E., Prohovnik, I., Stricks, L., Link, B.,
Lennon, M.C., et al. (1995). Relationship between lifetime occupation
and parietal flow: Implications for a reserve against Alzheimer's
disease pathology. Neurology, 45, 55--60. Stern, Y., Habeck, C.,
Moeller, J., Scarmeas, N., Anderson, K. E., Hilton, H.J., et al. (2005).
Brain networks associated with cognitive reserve in healthy young and
old adults. Cerebral Cortex, 15, 394--402. Sterr, A., Muller, M. M.,
Elbert, T., Rockstroh, B., Pantev, C., & Taub, E. (1998a). Perceptual
correlates of changes in cortical representation of fingers in blind
multifinger Braille readers. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 4417--4423.
Sterr, A., Muller, M. M., Elbert, T., Rockstroh, B., Pantev, C., & Taub,
E. (1998b). Changed perceptions in Braille readers. Nature, 391,
134--135. Stiles, J. (2000). Neural plasticity and cognitive
development. Developmental Neuropsychology, 18, 237--272. Stolorow, R.
D., & Atwood, G. E. (1979). Faces in a cloud: Subjectivity in
psychoanalytic theory. New York: Jason Aronson. Stranahan, A. M.,
Khalil, D., & Gould, E. (2006). Social isolation delays the positive
effects of running on adult neurogenesis. Nature Neuroscience, 9,
526--533. Strange, B. A., & Dolan, R. J. (2004). b-Adrenergic modulation
of emotional memory-evoked human amygdala and hippocampal responses.
Proceeding of the National Academy of Science, USA, 101, 11454--11458.
Straube, T., Glauer, M., Dilger, S., Mentzel, H., & Miltner, W. H. R.
(2006). Effects of cognitive-behavioral therapy on brain activation in
specific phobia. NeuroImage, 29(1), 125--135. Stuss, D. T., Gallup, G.
G., & Alexander, M. P. (2001). The frontal lobes are necessary for
"theory of mind." Brain, 124, 279--286. Sullivan, R. M., Wilson, D. A.,
& Leon, M. (1989). Norepinephrine and learning-induced plasticity in
infant rat olfactory system. Journal of Neuroscience, 9, 3998--4006.

Sulloway, F. J. (1979). Freud: Biologist of the mind. New York: Basic
Books. Sun, L., Jin, Z., Zang, Y. F., Zeng, Y. W., Liu, G., Li, Y., et
al. (2005). Differences between attention-deficit disorder with and
without hyperactivity: A 1H-magnetic spectroscopy study. Brain
Development, 27, 340--344. Svensson, T. H. (1987). Peripheral, autonomic
regulation of locus coeruleus noradrenergic neurons in the brain:
Putative implications for psychiatry and psychopharmacology.
Psychopharmacology, 92, 1--7. Swirsky-Sacchetti, T., Gorton, G., Samuel,
S., Sobel, R., GenettaWadley, A., & Burleigh, B. (1993).
Neuropsychological function in borderline personality disorder. Journal
of Clinical Psychology, 49, 385-- 396. Szyf, M., McGowan, P., & Meaney,
M. J. (2008). The social environment and epigenome. Environmental and
Molecular Mutagenesis, 49(1), 46--60. Szyf, M., Weaver, I. C. G.,
Champagne, F. A., Dioro, J., & Meaney, M. J. (2005). Maternal
programming of steroid receptor expression and phenotype through DNA
methylation in the rat. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology, 26, 139--162.
Szyf, M., Weaver, I., & Meaney, M. (2007). Maternal care, the epigenome
and phenotypic differences in behavior. Reproductive Toxicology, 24(1),
9--19. Taber, K. H., & Hurley, R. A. (2008). Astroglia: Not just glue.
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 20(2), 124--129.
Takahashi, T., Ikeda, K., Ishikawa, M., Tsukasaki, T., Nakama, D.,
Tanida, S., et al. (2004). Social stress-induced cortisol elevation
acutely impairs social memory in humans. Neuroscience Letters, 363,
125--130. Tamietto, M., Geminiani, G., Genero, R., & De Gelder, B.
(2007). Seeing fearful body language overcomes attentional deficits in
patients with neglect. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19, 445--454.
Tamm, L., Menon, V., & Reiss, A. L. (2006). Parietal attentional system
aberrations during target detection in adolescents with attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder: Event-related fMRI evidence. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 1033--1043. Tamm, L., Menon, V., Ringel, J.,
& Reiss, A. L. (2004). Event-related fMRI evidence of frontotemporal
involvement in aberrant response

inhibition and task switching in attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 43, 1430--1440. Tang, Y. P., Shimizu, E., Dube, G. R.,
Rampon, C., Kerchner, G. A., Zhuo, M., et al. (1999). Genetic
enhancement of learning and memory in mice. Nature, 401, 63--69. Tanji,
J., & Hoshi, E. (2001). Behavioral planning in the prefrontal cortex.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 11, 164--170. Taylor, G. J. (2000).
Recent developments in alexithymia theory and research. Canadian Journal
of Psychiatry, 45, 134--142. Taylor, J. (2001). The central role of the
parietal lobes in consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition, 10,
379--417. Taylor, M. A. (1999). The fundamentals of clinical
neuropsychiatry. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Taylor, S. E., &
Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A social psychological
perspective on mental health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193--210.
Teasdale, J. D., Howard, R. J., Cox, S. G., Ha, Y., Brammer, M. J.,
Williams, S. C. R., et al. (1999). Functional MRI study of the cognitive
generation of affect. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 209--215.
Teicher, M. H., Dumont, N. L., Ito, Y., Vaituzis, C., Geidd, J. N., &
Andersen, S. L. (2004). Childhood neglect is associated with reduced
corpus callosum area. Biological Psychiatry, 56, 80--85. Teicher, M. H.,
Ito, Y., Glod, C. A., Andersen, S. L., Dumont, N., & Ackerman, E.
(1997). Preliminary evidence for abnormal cortical development in
physically and sexually abused children using EEG coherence and MRI.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 821, 160--175. Tejedor-Real,
P., Costela, C., & Gibert-Rahola, J. (1998). Neonatal handling reduces
emotional reactivity and susceptibility to learned helplessness.
Involvement of catecholaminergic systems. Life Sciences, 62(1), 37--50.
ten Cate, C. (1989). Behavioral development: Toward understanding
processes. In P. P. G. Bateson & P. Klopfer (Eds.), Perspectives in
ethology (Vol. 8, pp. 243--269). New York: Plenum Press. Teneback, C.
C., Nahas, Z., Speer, A. M., Molloy, M., Stallings, L. E., Spicer, K.
M., et al. (1999). Changes in prefrontal cortex and paralimbic

activity in depression following two weeks of daily left prefrontal TMS.
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 11, 426--435.
Thatcher, R. W., Walker, R. A., & Giudice, S. (1987). Human cerebral
hemispheres develop at different rates and ages. Science, 236,
1110--1113. Thayer, J. F., & Cohen, B. H. (1985). Differential
hemispheric lateralization for positive and negative emotion: An
electromyographic study. Biological Psychology, 21, 265--266. Thomas, K.
S. (1987). General practice consultation: Is there any point in being
positive? British Medical Journal, 294, 1200--1202. Thompson, R. A.,
Lamb, M. E., & Estes, D. (1982). Stability of infantmother attachment
and its relationship to changing life circumstances in an unselected
middle-class sample. Child Development, 53, 144--148. Tillfors, M.,
Furmark, T., Marteinsdottir, I., Pissota, A., Langstrom, B., &
Fredrikson, M. (2001). Cerebral blood flow in subjects with social
phobia during stressful speaking tasks: A PET study. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 158, 1220--1226. Tillich, P. (1974). The courage to be. New
Haven: Yale University Press. Tomarken, A. J., & Davidson, R. J. (1994).
Frontal brain activation in repressors and nonrepressors. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 103, 339-- 349. Tomarken, A. J., Davidson, R. J.,
Wheeler, R. E., & Doss, R. C. (1992). Individual differences in anterior
brain asymmetry and fundamental dimentions of emotion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 676--687. Torasdotter, M.,
Metsis, M., Henriksson, B. G., Winblad, B., & Mohammed, A. H. (1998).
Environmental enrichment results in higher levels of nerve growth factor
MRNA in the rat visual cortex and hippocampus. Behavioral Brain
Research, 93, 83--90. Trapolini, T., Ungerer, J. A., & McMahon, C. A.
(2008). Maternal depression: Relations with maternal caregiving
representations and emotional availability during the preschool years.
Attachment and Human Development, 10(1), 73--90. Travis, L. A., Bliwise,
N. G., Binder, J. L., & Horne-Moyer, H. L. (2001). Changes in clients'
attachment styles over the course of timelimited dynamic psychotherapy.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 38(2), 149--159.

Tremblay, L., & Schultz, W. (1999). Relative reward preference in
primate orbitofrontal cortex. Nature, 398, 704--708. Trevarthen, C.
(1993). The self born in intersubjectivity: The psychology of an infant
communicating. In U. Neisser (Ed.), The perceived self: Ecological and
interpersonal sources of self-knowledge (pp. 121--173). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. Triggs, W. J., McCoy, K. J., Greer, R.,
Rossi, F., Bowers, D., Kortenkamp, S., et al. (1999). Effects of left
frontal transcranial magnetic stimulation on depressed mood, cognition,
and corticomotor threshold. Biological Psychiatry, 45, 1440--1446.
Trojan, S., & Pokorny, J. (1999). Theoretical aspects of
neuroplasticity. Physiological Research, 48(2), 87--97. Tsoory, M. M.,
Vouimba, R. M., Akirav, I., Kavushansky, A., Avital, A., & Richer-Levin,
G. (2008). Amygdala modulation of memory-related processes in the
hippocampus: Potential relevance to PTSD. Progress in Brain Research,
167, 35--49. Tucker, D. M. (1992). Developing emotions and cortical
networks. In M. R. Gunnar & C. Nelson (Eds.), Minnesota symposia on
child psychology: Vol. 24. Developmental behavioral neuroscience
(pp. 75--128). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Tucker, D. M., Luu, P., &
Pribram, K. H. (1995). Social and emotional self-regulation. In J.
Grafman & K. J. Hoyoak (Eds.), Structure and functions of the human
prefrontal cortex (pp. 213--239). New York: New York Academy of
Sciences. Tulving, E. (1985). How many memory systems are there?
American Psychologist, 40, 385--398. Turke, P. W. (1997). Hypothesis:
Menopause discourages infanticide and encourages continued investment by
agnates. Evolution and Human Behavior, 18, 3--13. Tyrka, A. R., Wier,
L., Price, L. H., Ross, N., Anderson, G. M., Wilkinson, C. W., et
al. (2008). Childhood parental loss and adult
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function. Biological Psychiatry, 63,
1147-- 1154. Uddin, L. Q., Kaplan, J. T., Molnar-Szakacs, I., Zaidel,
E., & Iacoboni, M. (2005). Self-face recognition activates a
frontoparietal "mirror" network in the right hemisphere: An
event-related fMRI study. Neuroimage, 25, 926--935.

Ulfig, N., Setzer, M., & Bohl, J. (2003). Ontogeny of the human
amygdala. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 985, 22--33.
Ulrich, R. (1984). View through a window may influence recovery from
surgery. Science, 224, 420--421. Ungerleider, L. G. (1995). Functional
brain imaging studies of cortical mechanisms for memory. Science, 270,
769--775. Ungerleider, L. G., & Haxby, J. V. (1994). "What" and "where"
in the human brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 4, 157--165. Urry,
H. L., Nitschke, J. B., Dolski, I., Jackson, D. C., Dalton, K. M.,
Mueller, C. J., et al. (2004). Making a life worth living: Neural
correlates of well-being. Psychological Science, 15, 367--372. Urry, H.
L., van Reekum, C. M., Johnstone, T., Kalin, N. H., Thurow, M.E.,
Schaefer, H. S., et al. (2006). Amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal
cortex are inversely coupled during regulation of negative affect and
predict the diurnal patten of cortisol secretion among older adults.
Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 4415--4425. Usdin, E., Kvetnansky, R., &
Kopin, I. J. (1976). Stress and catecholamines. Oxford: Pergamon.
Vaidya, C. J., Austin, G., Kirkorian, G., Ridlehuber, H. W., Desmond, J.
E., Glover, G. H., et al. (1998). Selective effects of methyphenidate in
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: A functional magnetic
resonance study. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA,
95, 14494-- 14499. Vaina, L. M., Solomon, J., Chowdhury, S., Sinha, P.,
& Belliveau, J. W. (2001). Functional neuroanatomy of biological motion
perception in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 98, 11656--11661. Vallar, G., Sterzi, R., Bottini, G., Cappa, S., &
Rusconi, M. L. (1990). Temporary remission of left hemianesthesia after
vestibular stimulation: A sensory neglect phenomenon. Cortex, 26,
123--131. Vallée, M., Maccari, S., Dellu, F., Simon, H., Le Moal, M., &
Mayo, W. (1999). Long-term effects of prenatal stress and postnatal
handling on agerelated glucocorticoid secretion and cognitive
performance: A longitudinal study in the rat. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 11, 2906--2916. Vallée, M., Mayo, W., Dellu, F., Le Moal,
M., Simon, H., & Maccari, S. (1997). Prenatal stress induces high
anxiety and postnatal handling induces

low anxiety in adult offspring: Correlation with stress-induced
corticosterone secretion. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 2626--2636. van
der Kolk, B. A. (1988). The trauma spectrum: The interaction of
biological and social events in the genesis of the trauma response.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 1, 273--290. van der Kolk, B. A. (1994).
The body keeps the score: Memory and the evolving psychobiology of post
traumatic stress. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 1(5), 253--265. van der
Kolk, B. A., Blitz, R., Burr, W., Sherry, S., & Hartmann, E. (1984).
Nightmares and trauma: A comparison of nightmares after combat with
lifelong nightmares in veterans. American Journal of Psychiatry, 141,
187--190. van der Kolk, B. A., & Greenberg, M. S. (1987). The
psychobiology of the traumatic response: Hyperarousal, constriction, and
addiction to traumatic reexposure. In B. A. van der Kolk (Ed.),
Psychological trauma (pp. 63--87). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Press. van der Kolk, B. A., Pelcovitz, D., Roth, S., Mandel, F. S.,
McFarlane, A., & Herman, J. L. (1996). Dissociation, somatization, and
affect dysregulation: The complexity of adaptation to trauma. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 83--95. Vanduffel, W., Fize, D., Peuskens,
H., Denys, K., Sunaert, S., Todd, J. T., et al. (2002). Extracting 3D
from motion: Differences in human and monkey intraparietal cortex.
Science, 298, 413--415. van Hoesen, G. W. (1981). The differential
distribution, diversity and sprouting of cortical projections to the
amygdala in the rhesus monkey. In Y. Ben-Ari (Ed.), The amygdaloid
complex (pp. 77--90). Amsterdam: Elsevier/North Holland Biomedical
Press. Van Opstal, F., Verguts, G., & Fias, W. (2008). A
hippocampal-parietal network for learning an ordered sequence.
NeuroImage, 40, 333--341. van Reekum, C., Urry, H., Johnson, T., Throw,
M., Frye, F., Jackson, C., et al. (2007). Individual differences in
amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex activity are associated with
evaluation speed and psychological well-being. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19(2), 237-- 248. Vansteenwegen, D., Hermans, D.,
Vervliet, B., Francken, G., Beckers, T., Baeyens, F., et al. (2005).
Return of fear in a human differential

conditioning paradigm caused by a return to the original acquisition
context. Behavior Research and Therapy, 43 323--326. Vasterling, J. J.,
Brailey, K., Constans, J. I., & Sutker, P. B. (1998). Attention and
memory dysfunction in posttraumatic stress disorder. Neuropsychology,
12, 125--133. Vaughn, B., Egeland, B., Sroufe, L. A., & Waters, E.
(1979). Individual differences in infant-mother attachment at twelve and
eighteen months: Stability and change in families under stress. Child
Development, 50, 971-- 975. Vernadakis, A. (1996). Glia-neuron
intercommunications and synaptic plasticity. Progressive Neurobiology,
49, 185--214. Victor, M., & Ropper, A. H. (2001). Adams and Victor's
principles of neurology (7th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. Villarreal,
G., Hamilton, D. A., Petropoulos, H., Driscoll, I., Rowland, L.M.,
Griego, J. A., et al. (2002). Reduced hippocampal volume and total white
matter volume in posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
52, 119--125. Vogeley, K., May, M., Ritzl, A., Falkai, P., Zilles, K., &
Fink, G. R. (2004). Neural correlates of first-person perspective as one
constituent of human self-consciousness. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16, 817-- 827. Vogt, B. A. (2005). Pain and emotion
interactions in subregions of the cingulate gyrus. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 6, 533--544. von Bonin, G. (1963). The evolution of the
human brain. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Vondra, J. I., Shaw,
D. S., Swearingen, L., Cohen, M., & Owens, E. B. (2001). Attachment
stability and emotional and behavioral regulation from infancy to
preschool age. Development and Psychopathology, 13, 13--33. Vyas, A.,
Bernal, S., & Chattarji, S. (2003). Effects of chronic stress on
dendritic arborization in the central and extended amygdala. Brain
Research, 965, 290--294. Vyas, A., & Chattarji, S. (2004). Modulation of
different states of anxiety-like behavior by chronic stress. Behavioral
Neuroscience, 118, 1450--1454. Vythilingam, M., Heim, C., Newport, J.,
Miller, A. H., Anderson, E., Bronen, R., et al. (2002). Childhood trauma
associated with smaller

hippocampal volume in women with major depression. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 159, 2072--2080. Wada, J. (1961). Modification of cortically
induced responses in brain stem by shift of attention in monkeys.
Science, 133, 40--42. Wager, T. D., Davidson, M. L., Hughes, B. L.,
Lindquist, M. A., & Ochsner, K. N. (2008). Prefrontal-subcortical
pathways mediating successful emotion regulation. Neuron, 59,
1037--1050. Wager, T. D., Rilling, J. K., Smith, E. E., Sokolik, A.,
Casey, K. L., Davidson, R. J., et al. (2004). Placebo-induced changes in
fMRI in the anticipation and experience of pain. Science, 303,
1162--1167. Wagner, A. D., Shannon, B. J., Kahn, I., & Buckner, L.
(2005). Parietal lobe contributions to episodic memory retrieval. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 446--453. Walach, H., & Jonas, W. B. (2004).
Placebo research: The evidence base for harnessing self-healing
capacities. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 10(1),
103--112. Walsh, R. N., Budtz-Olsen, O. E., Penny, J. E., & Cummins, R.
A. (1969). The effects of environmental complexity of the histology of
the rat hippocampus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 137, 361--366.
Walsh, V., Ashbridge, E., & Cowey, A. (1998). Cortical plasticity in
perceptual learning demonstrated by transcranial magnetic stimulation.
Neuropsychologia, 36, 45--49. Walton, M., Bannerman, D., Alterescu, K.,
& Rushworth, M. (2003). Functional specialization within medial frontal
cortex of the anterior cingulate for evaluating effort-related
decisions. Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 6475--6479. Wanisch, K., Tang,
J., Mederer, A., & Wotjak, C. T. (2005). Trace fear conditioning depends
on NMDA receptor activation and protein synthesis within the dorsal
hippocampus of mice. Behavioral Brain Research, 157(1), 63--69.
Warner-Schmidt, J. L., & Duman, R. S. (2006). Hippocampal neurogenesis:
Opposing effects of stress and antidepressant treatment. Hippocampus,
16(3), 239--249. Watanabe, M. (1996). Reward expectancy in primate
prefrontal neurons. Nature, 382, 629--632. Watanabe, Y., Gould, E.,
Daniels, D. C., Cameron, H., & McEwen, B. S. (1992). Tianeptine
attenuates stress-induced morphological changes in

the hippocampus. European Journal of Pharmacology, 222, 157--162.
Watanabe, Y. E., Gould, E., & McEwen, B. S. (1992). Stress induced
atrophy of apical dendrites of hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons. Brain
Research, 588, 341--345. Waters, E., Merrick, S., Treboux, D., Crowell,
J., & Albersheim, L. (2000). Attachment security in infancy and early
adulthood: A twenty-year longitudinal study. Child Development, 71,
684--689. Weaver, I. C. G., Cervoni, N., Champagne, F. A., D'Alessio, A.
C., Sharma, S., Seckl, J. R., et al. (2004). Epigenetic programming by
maternal behavior. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 847--854. Weaver, I. C. G.,
Champagne, F. A., Brown, S. E., Dymov, S., Sharma, S., Meaney, M. J., et
al. (2005). Reversal of maternal programming of stress response in adult
offspring through methyl supplementation: Altering epigenetic marking
later in life. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 11045--11054. Weaver, I. C.
G., D'Alessio, A. C., Brown, S. E., Hellstrom, I. C., Dymov, S., Sharma,
S., et al. (2007). The transcription factor nerve growth
factor-inducible protein a mediates epigenetic programming: Altering
epigenetic marks by immediate-early genes. Journal of Neuroscience, 27,
1756--1768. Weaver, I. C. G., Grant, R. J., & Meaney, M. J. (2002).
Maternal behavior regulates long-term hippocampal expression of BAX and
apoptosis in the offspring. Journal of Neurochemistry, 82, 998--1002.
Weaver, I. C. G., Meaney, M. J., & Szyf, M. (2006). Maternal care
effects on the hippocampal transcriptome and anxiety-mediated behaviors
in the offspring that are reversible in adulthood. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 3480--3485. Weaver, S. A.,
Aherne, F. X., Meaney, M. J., Schaefer, A. L., & Dixon W. T. (2000).
Neonatal handling permanently alters hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal axis
function, behavior, and body weight in boars. Journal of Endocrinology,
164, 349--359. Weiner, I. (1998). Principles of psychotherapy. New York:
Wiley and Sons. Weinfield, N. S., Sroufe, L. A., & Egeland, B. (2000).
Attachment from infancy to young adulthood in a high-risk sample:
Continuity, discontinuity, and their correlates. Child Development, 71,
695--702. Weingarten, S. M., Cherlow, D. G., & Holmgren, E. (1977). The
relationship of hallucinations to the depth structures of the temporal
lobe.

Acta Neurochirurgica, 24(Suppl.), 199--216. Weinger, G., Lange, C.,
Sachsse, U., & Irle, E. (2008). Amygdala and hippocampal volumes and
cognition in adult survivors of childhood abuse with dissociative
disorders. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 118, 281--290. Wellington,
N., & Rieder, M. J. (1993). Attitudes and practices regarding analgesia
for newborn circumcision. Pediatrics, 92, 541--543. West, M. J. (1993).
Regionally specific loss of neurons in the aging human hippocampus.
Neurobiology of Aging, 14, 287--293. Wexler, B. E., & Heninger, G. R.
(1979). Alterations in cerebral laterality during acute psychotic
illness. Archives of General Psychiatry, 36, 278--284. Whalen, P. J.,
Johnstone, T., Somerville, L. H., Nitschke, J. B., Polis, S., Alexander,
A. L., et al. (2008). A functional magnetic resonance imaging predictor
of treatment response to venlafaxine in generalized anxiety disorder.
Biological Psychiatry, 63, 858--863. Whalley, L. J., Deary, I. J.,
Appleton, C. L., & Starr, J. M. (2004). Cognitive reserve and the
neurobiology of cognitive aging. Ageing Research Reviews, 3, 369--382.
Wheeler, R. E., Davidson, R. J., & Tomarken, A. J. (1993). Frontal brain
asymmetry and emotional reactivity: A biological substrate of affective
style. Psychophysiology, 30, 82--89. White, S. A. (2001). Learning to
communicate. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 11, 510--520. Widom, C.
S., DuMont, K., & Czaja, S. J. (2007). A prospective investigation of
major depressive disorder and comorbidity in abused and neglected
children grown up. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 49--56. Wiens, S.
(2006). Subliminal emotion perception in brain imaging: Findings,
issues, and recommendations. Progress in Brain Research, 156, 105--121.
Willcutt, E. G., Dole, A. E., Nigg, J. T., Faraone, S. V., & Pennington,
B. F. (2005). Validity of the executive function theory of attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A meta-analytic review. Biological
Psychiatry, 57, 1336--1346. Williams, L. M. (1994). Recall of childhood
trauma: A prospective study of women's memories of child sexual abuse.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 1167--1176.

Williams, L. M., Kemp, A. H., Felmingham, K., Barton, M., Olivieri, G.,
Peduto, A., et al. (2006). Trauma modulates amygdala and medial
prefrontal responses to consciously attended fear. NeuroImage, 29, 347--
357. Williams, L. M., Phillips, M. L., Brammer, M. J., Skerrett, D.,
Lagopoulos, J., Rennie, C., et al. (2001). Arousal dissociates amygdala
and hippocampal fear responses: Evidence from simultaneous fMRI and skin
conductance recording. NeuroImage, 14, 1070--1079. Wilson, F. A. W.,
O'Scalaidhe, S. P., & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1993). Dissociation of
object and spatial processing domains in primate prefrontal cortex.
Science, 260, 1955--1958. Wilson, F. R. (1998). The hand. New York:
Vintage Books. Winick, M., Katchadurian, K., & Harris, R. C. (1975).
Malnutrition and environmental enrichment by early adoption. Science,
190, 1173--1175. Winnicott, D. W. (1958). The capacity to be alone. In
Maturational processes and the facilitating environment: Studies in the
theory of emotional development (pp. 29--36). New York: International
Universities Press. Winnicott, D. W. (1962). Ego integration in child
development. In Maturational processes and the facilitating environment:
Studies in the theory of emotional development (pp. 56--63) New York:
International Universities Press. Winnicott, D. W. (1963). From
dependence to independence in the development of the individual. In
Maturational processes and the facilitating environment: Studies in the
theory of emotional development (pp. 83--99). New York: International
Universities Press. Witelson, S. F., Kigar, D. L., & Harvey, T. (1999).
The exceptional brain of Albert Einstein. The Lancet, 353, 2149--2153.
Wittling, W. (1997). The right hemisphere and the human stress response.
Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, 161(640) (Suppl.), 55--59. Wittling, W.,
& Pfluger, M. (1990). Neuroendocrine hemisphere asymmetries: Salivary
cortisol secretion during lateralized viewing of emotion-related and
neutral films. Brain and Cognition, 14, 243--265. Wolf, N. S., Gales, M.
E., Shane, E., & Shane, M. (2000). The developmental trajectory from
amodal perception to empathy and communication: The role of mirror
neurons in this process. Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 21, 94--112.

Wolpe, J. (1958). Psychotherapy by reciprocal inhibition. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press. Wolpert, D. M., Goodbody, S. J., & Husain, M.
(1998). Maintaining internal representations: The role of the human
superior parietal lobe. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 529--533. Woolley, C.
S., Gould, E., & McEwen, B. S. (1990). Exposure to excess
glucocorticoids alters dendritic morphology of adult hippocampal
pyramidal neurons. Brain Research, 531, 225--231. Wu, J., Buchsbaum, M.
S., Gillin, J. C., Tang, C., Cadwell, S., Wiegand, M., et al. (1999).
Prediction of antidepressant effects of sleep deprivation by metabolic
rates in the ventral anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1149--1158. Wykes, T., Brammer, M.,
Mellers, J., Bray, P., Reeder, C., Williams, C., et al. (2002). Effects
of the brain of psychological treatment: Cognitive remediation therapy.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 191, 144--152. Yau, J. L. W., Olsson, T.,
Morris, R. G. M., Meaney, M. J., & Seckl, J. R. (1995). Glucocorticoids,
hippocampal corticosteroid receptor gene expression and antidepressant
treatment: Relationship with spatial learning in young and aged rats.
Neuroscience, 6(3), 571--581. Yehuda, R. (1999). Biological factors
associated with susceptibility to post-traumatic stress disorder.
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 44, 34--39. Yehuda, R., Bierer, L. M.,
Schmeidler, J., Aferiat, D. H., Breslau, I., & Dolan, S. (2000). Low
cortisol and risk for PTSD in adult offspring of holocaust survivors.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1252--1259. Yehuda, R., Kahana, B.,
Schmeidler, J., Southwick, S. M., Wilson, S., & Giller, E. I. (1995).
Impact of cumulative lifetime trauma and recent stress on current
posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms in holocaust survivors. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1815--1818. Yehuda, R., & Siever, L. J.
(1997). Persistent effects of stress in trauma survivors and their
descendants. Biological Psychiatry, 41, 1S--120S. Yerkes, M., & Dodson,
D. (1908). The relation of strength to rapidity of habit-formation.
Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology, 18, 459--482. Yovell,
Y. (2000). From hysteria to posttraumatic stress disorder:
Psychoanalysis and the neurobiology of traumatic memories.
Neuropsychoanalysis, 2, 171--181.

Yu-Feng, Z., Yong, H., Chao-Zhe, Z., Qing-Jiu, C., Man-Qiu, S., Meng,
L., et al. (2007). Altered baseline brain activity in children with ADHD
revealed by resting-state functional MRI. Brain and Development, 29,
83-- 91. Zahm, D. S. (2006). The evolving theory of basal forebrain
functionalanatomical "macrosystems." Neuroscience and Behavioral
Reviews, 30, 148--172. Zald, D. H., & Kim, S. W. (2001). The
orbitofrontal cortex. In S. P. Salloway, P. F. Malloy, & J. D. Duffy
(Eds.), The frontal lobes and neuropsychiatric illness (pp. 33--69).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Zang, Y., Jin, Z., Weng, X.,
Zhang, L., Zeng, Y., & Yang, L. (2005). Functional MRI in
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: Evidence for hypofrontality.
Brain and Development, 27, 544--550. Zeitlin, S. B., Lane, R. D.,
O'Leary, D. S., & Schrift, M. J. (1989). Interhemispheric transfer
deficit and alexithymia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 146,
1434--1439. Zeitlin, S. B., & McNally, R. J. (1991). Implicit and
explicit memory bias for threat in post traumatic stress disorder.
Behavior Research and Therapy, 29, 451--457. Zeltzer, L. K., Anderson,
C. T. M., & Schecter, N. L. (1990). Pediatric pain: Current status and
new directions. Current Problems in Pediatrics, 20, 415--486. Zhang, L.
X., Levine, S., Dent, G., Zhan, Y., Xing, G., Okimoto, D., et
al. (2002). Maternal deprivation increases cell death in the infant rat
brain. Developmental Brain Research, 133, 1--11. Zhang, T. Y., Chretien,
P., Meaney, M. J., & Gratton, A. (2005). Influence of naturally
occurring variations in maternal care on prepulse inhibition of acoustic
startle and the medial prefrontal cortical dopamine response to stress
in adult rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 1493--1502. Zhang, T.,
Parent, C., Weaver, I., & Meaney, M. J. (2004). Maternal programming of
individual differences in defensive responses in the rat. Annals of New
York Academy of Sciences, 1032, 85--103. Zhao, M., Toyoda, H., Lee, Y.,
Wu, L., Ko, S. W., Zhang, X., et al. (2005). Roles of NMDA NR2B subtype
receptor in prefrontal long-term potentiation and contextual fear
memory. Neuron, 47, 859--872.

Zhu, X. O., & Waite, P. M. E. (1998). Cholinergic depletion reduces
plasticity of barrel field cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 8, 63--72.
Zola-Morgan, S. M., & Squire, L. R. (1990). The primate hippocampal
formation: Evidence for a time-limited role in memory storage. Science,
250, 288--290. Zubieta, J. K., Bueller, J. A., Jackson, L. R., Scott, D.
J., Xu, Y., Koeppe, R.A., et al. (2005). Placebo effects mediated by
endogenous opioid activity on µopioid receptors. Journal of
Neuroscience, 25, 7754--7762. Zuckerman, B., Bauchner, H., Parker, S., &
Cabral, H. (1990). Maternal depressive symptoms during pregnancy, and
newborn irritability. Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 11,
190--194. OceanofPDF.com

THE NORTON SERIES ON INTERPERSONAL NEUROBIOLOGY Allan N. Schore, PhD,
Series Editor Daniel J. Siegel, MD, Founding Editor The field of mental
health is in a tremendously exciting period of growth and conceptual
reorganization. Independent findings from a variety of scientific
endeavors are converging in an interdisciplinary view of the mind and
mental well-being. An interpersonal neurobiology of human development
enables us to understand that the structure and function of the mind and
brain are shaped by experiences, especially those involving emotional
relationships. The Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology will
provide cutting-edge, multidisciplinary views that further our
understanding of the complex neurobiology of the human mind. By drawing
on a wide range of traditionally independent fields of research---such
as neurobiology, genetics, memory, attachment, complex systems,
anthropology, and evolutionary psychology---these texts will offer
mental health professionals a review and synthesis of scientific
findings often inaccessible to clinicians. These books aim to advance
our understanding of human experience by finding the unity of knowledge,
or consilience, that emerges with the translation of findings from
numerous domains of study into a common language and conceptual
framework. The series will integrate the best of modern science with the
healing art of psychotherapy. OceanofPDF.com


